Title: Geometry-informed neural atlas for boundary value problems of complex 3D geometries

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00285v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 00:22:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering manuscript No. 

(will be inserted by the editor) 

# Geometry-informed neural atlas for boundary value problems of complex 3D geometries 

WaiChing Sun a

> Received: [DATE] / Accepted: [DATE]

Abstract When three-dimensional bodies contain thin features, non-trivial topology, or scan-derived surfaces, vol-umetric meshing can become the dominant bottleneck in simulation workflows. We replace this step with a learned geometric representation: overlapping volumetric coordinate charts, each equipped with a neural decoder and Jaco-bian, trained from point-cloud or level-set data to form a differentiable atlas. Governing equations are pulled back to chart-local reference coordinates via the Piola identity, and local solutions are coupled through multiplicative Schwarz iterations on the overlap graph. Because the atlas is constructed independently of the downstream discretization, one frozen geometric substrate can support fundamentally different solvers (for example, a meshfree physics-informed neural network and a conventional finite-element method) without re-meshing or re-parametrization. Benchmark and verification studies show that the learned atlas preserves expected finite-element convergence behavior and enables both forward and inverse analyses on geometries that would otherwise require solver-specific volumetric meshing. 

Keywords coordinate charts, Schwarz method, physics-informed neural networks, meshfree methods, complex geometry, elastoplasticity 

1 Introduction 

The conventional computational-mechanics pipeline proceeds from a CAD model or surface description through volumetric meshing to a PDE solver [1–3]. When the spatial domain is geometrically complex—containing thin features, strongly curved interiors, non-trivial topology, or surfaces imported from scanning data—meshing itself becomes a substantial engineering task [4]. This paper introduces an alternative approach that uses neural networks to represent complex geometries, including domains that are not homeomorphic to a sphere. We refer to this representation as a neural atlas. It is designed to define the computational domain, provide the change-of-variables formulas required by the PDE operator, and organize inter-subdomain coupling within one geometric construction. A neural atlas is an overlapping collection of volumetric coordinate charts parameterized by neural networks. Each chart is equipped with a decoder map 𝜑 𝑖 : bΩ𝑖 → Ω𝑖 and its Jacobian J𝑖 , and is constructed as a geometric object before any PDE is posed. By “geometry-first”, we mean that an atlas generated by this pipeline serves as the computational substrate for local solvers—neural or classical—without re-meshing or re-parametrization. Governing equations are then pulled back to chart-local reference coordinates via the Piola identity, and chart-local solutions are coupled through multiplicative Schwarz iterations with partition-of-unity blending. 1.1 Relation to prior work The Piola-mapped operators used in this work are standard in isogeometric analysis [5, 6] and mapped finite elements [7]. In the multi-patch IGA setting, NURBS patches with explicit parametrizations are coupled through                  

> aDepartment of Civil Engineering and Engineering Mechanics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. E-mail: wsun@columbia.edu
> arXiv:2604.00285v1 [physics.comp-ph] 31 Mar 2026 2WaiChing Sun a

mortar or penalty methods on conforming interfaces [8]. Nitsche-type coupling [9] and Schwarz-type overlapping methods [10] have also been developed for multi-patch IGA on complex geometries. Accordingly, our contribution is not the Piola mapping itself, but the geometric substrate on which mapped operators are defined. We replace CAD-derived NURBS patches with neural volumetric charts learned directly from point-cloud or level-set data. Chart overlap is an intrinsic part of the representation, so the Schwarz decomposition is induced directly by the atlas construction. Relative to overlapping Schwarz and domain-decomposition methods [11, 12], the present framework borrows the coupling logic but changes the source of the subdomains: the atlas defines both the geometry and the decomposition simultaneously, rather than partitioning an already-discretized domain. Relative to decomposition-based neural solvers such as XPINNs and FBPINNs [13–15], which partition a pre-defined domain to improve training, here the partition emerges from the charts that form the atlas. In the neural operator literature, DeepONet [16] and the Fourier Neural Operator [17] learn solution maps across parameterized PDE families but require training data from an existing solver and do not supply coordinate chart structure. Physics-informed neural operators (PINO) [18] reduce the data requirement by incorporating PDE residuals during training but still operate on a fixed spatial grid. The present atlas approach is complementary: it provides the geometric infrastructure on which either data-driven or physics-informed solvers can operate. In data-driven computational mechanics, Kirchdoerfer and Ortiz [19] proposed a model-free approach that bypasses constitutive equations entirely, while kernel-based constitutive learning has also been developed by Kanno [20]. Physics-constrained local convexity data-driven modeling for anisotropic nonlinear elastic solids was developed by He et al. [21] where local Euclidean space is constructed to replace classical constitutive updates. Neural-network constitutive models [22, 23] learn material response from data while enforcing thermodynamic constraints. Bahmani and Sun [24] introduced manifold embedding in a data-driven mechanics setting, showing how low-dimensional geometric structure can regularize constitutive data and improve robustness. In Xiao and Sun [25], geometric priors for multi-resolution yielding manifolds are combined with local closest-point projection to handle nearly non-smooth plasticity. In Jian et al. [26], geometric learning is integrated with discrete dislocation dynamics data to predict the yield surface of single-crystal copper. This viewpoint is conceptually aligned with our use of geometric structure as a first-class computational object. The inverse identification benchmarks in the present work (Examples 4–5) use parametric constitutive laws rather than learned energy functionals, but the chart-local FEM infrastructure could accommodate neural constitutive models in the same reference-coordinate framework. Neural implicit representations [27, 28] reconstruct surfaces from data but do not by themselves furnish solver-ready volumetric atlases with chart Jacobians, overlap structure, and transition operators for mapped PDE evaluation. The idea of using neural networks to parametrize coordinate charts is aligned with the deep geometric prior of Williams et al. [29], which learns chart-like neural surface parameterizations for reconstruction. Our contribution is to introduce mapped differential operators on these learned charts and to leverage their overlap-induced decomposition in a multiplicative Schwarz solver. Geometry-aware positional encodings based on Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions (Δ-PINNs, Sahli Costabal et al. 30) improve PINN training on complex shapes but still require a background mesh to compute the eigenfunctions and operators, whereas the present atlas provides both the coordinate system and the PDE operator pullback in a single geometric object. 1.2 Key Contributions The paper makes the following contributions: 1. Neural chart-based geometric decomposition. Overlapping volumetric charts, equipped with learned decoder maps and quality-assured through geometric gate metrics, define both the domain representation and the Schwarz overlap structure. This same atlas pipeline supports multiple local solver families without re-parametrization. The chart count is a tunable parameter analogous to the number of subdomains in a domain decomposition method. (Examples 1–3). 2. Inter-chart consistency through Schwarz coupling. The multiplicative Schwarz iteration maintains interface displacement jumps at 𝑂 (10 −7) throughout history-dependent cyclic loading, and per-chart material parameters converge to machine-precision consensus in the inverse setting, confirming that the coupling enforces global consistency without additional constraints. 3. Validations on PDE solvers applied on complex geometries. On a twelve-chart rabbit Poisson problem, a compact PINN achieves relative 𝐿 2 error 2 .21 × 10 −2, while a P1 tetrahedral FEM on an eight-chart atlas built by the same pipeline recovers the expected 𝑂 (ℎ2) convergence rate across five refinement levels. This result confirms that geometry-informed neural charts 3

the mapped operator, Schwarz coupling, and partition-of-unity blending introduce no order-of-accuracy penalty. Meanwhile, the resultant atlas is a reusable geometric scaffold that can be incorporated in different PDE solvers (Example 2). An eight-chart Schwarz forward BVP solves 𝐽 2 elastoplasticity with kinematic hardening under cyclic loading on the torus, showing that the atlas infrastructure supports nonlinear equilibrium solves where the displacement field is unknown and must be determined from the balance of momentum (Example 3). Constitutive identification on the same domain recovers Neo-Hookean parameters with machine-precision inter-chart consensus (𝜇 std = 1.47 × 10 −13 ), and an elastoplastic extension identifies yield stress and hardening modulus from cyclic data (Examples 4–5). These problems show that the proposed method is capable of solving inverse and forward problems in bodies with complex details and not homomorphic to sphere. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the volumetric atlas and mapped PDE operator. Section 3 presents the fixed-atlas solvers, including the Schwarz PINN and chart-local FEM realizations. Section 4 summarizes the geometry pipeline and quality gates. Section 5 presents numerical evidence, and Section 6 discusses the relation to isogeometric analysis, current limitations, and future directions. 

2 Geometry and Operator Mapping 

We first define the notation used in this section. We use 𝒙 for a point in the physical body, 𝜻 for a chart-local reference coordinate on one atlas patch, and 𝝃 for the global reference-ball coordinate used only in the special simply connected examples. This two-level notation is enough for the methodology while avoiding the earlier conflict in which one symbol was asked to represent both a local chart coordinate and a global reference coordinate. 2.1 Geometric setting: manifold, coordinate charts, and atlas Let Ω ⊂ R3 be a bounded body with sufficiently regular boundary 𝜕 Ω. From a computational standpoint, the closure Ω may be viewed as a compact three-dimensional manifold with boundary embedded in the ambient Euclidean space [31]. While a single low-distortion volumetric parametrization is not always sufficient to represent such a body, it may still be described by several compatible local volumetric coordinates, known as coordinate charts. The implementation therefore works with a finite computational atlas of bounded patches in R3. This manifold viewpoint provides the minimal structure needed to treat these overlapping patches as a single geometric object (see Fig. 1). 

2.1.1 Coordinate charts and local coordinates 

A coordinate chart is, in general, a pair (𝑈 𝑖 , 𝜑 𝑖 ) where 𝑈 𝑖 ⊂ R𝑛 is an open coordinate domain and 𝜑 𝑖 : 𝑈 𝑖 → M

is a smooth map into an 𝑛 -dimensional manifold (or manifold with boundary) [31]. For 3D domains, we set 𝑛 = 3, such that each coordinate chart is volumetric. As such, the downstream solver must sample interior collocation points, evaluate volumetric PDE residuals, and communicate information through overlapping subregions. The basic chart family is written as 

A = {( bΩ𝑖 , 𝜑 𝑖 )} 𝑀 𝑖 =1, bΩ𝑖 ⊂ R3, 𝜑 𝑖 : bΩ𝑖 → R3, (1) with physical patches 

Ω𝑖 := 𝜑 𝑖 (bΩ𝑖 ), Ω ⊂

> 𝑀

Ø

> 𝑖 =1

Ω𝑖 . (2) where 𝑀 ∈ N denotes the total number of charts in the atlas. Assuming that the 3D body is sufficiently smooth, the Jacobian of chart 𝑖 exists and can be denoted by 

J𝑖 (𝜻 ) := 𝐷 𝜻 𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ) ∈ R3×3, 𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 ) := det J𝑖 (𝜻 ). (3) For the mapped PDE derivations below, each chart is assumed to be locally nondegenerate: 

𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 ) ≥ 𝑗 min > 0 for all sampled 𝜻 ∈ bΩ𝑖 . (4) 4 WaiChing Sun a           

> Reference charts Physical atlas
> bΩ1
> bΩ2
> bΩ3
> Ω
> Ω1
> Ω2
> Ω3
> Ω12
> Ω23
> 𝜑 1
> 𝜋 1
> 𝜑 2
> 𝜋 2
> 𝜑 3
> 𝜋 3
> Global blend from local chart fields
> 𝑢 ℎ(𝑥 )=∑︁
> 𝑖
> 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 )b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜋 𝑖 (𝑥 ) )

Fig. 1: Conceptual view of the volumetric neural atlas. The left side shows chart-local reference patches (unit balls) parameterized by 𝜻 ; the right side shows their mapped physical images covering overlapping parts of Ω. Solid arrows represent the chart maps 𝜑 𝑖 ; dashed arrows represent the local inverses 𝜋 𝑖 . The lower formula indicates the global blend assembled from the chart-local fields. The drawing is a planar slice through a three-dimensional construction. This condition guarantees a locally invertible change of variables. It does not by itself imply global injectivity. Whenever we refer to a chart inverse 

𝜋 𝑖 := 𝜑 −1 

> 𝑖

: Ω𝑖 → bΩ𝑖 , (5) we mean the inverse on a patch where the chart is assumed or verified to be injective. In the implementation, positive Jacobian determinant is enforced or monitored at sampled points, while global injectivity is treated as a training objective rather than an established geometric property from (4). Each chart is anchored at a seed point 𝒔 𝑖 with an orthonormal local frame {t1𝑖 , t2𝑖 , n𝑖 }, and a physical sample 𝒙 is first expressed in rigid local coordinates by 

𝜻 rig  

> 𝑖

(𝒙 ) := (( 𝒙 − 𝒔 𝑖 ) · t1𝑖 , (𝒙 − 𝒔 𝑖 ) · t2𝑖 , (𝒙 − 𝒔 𝑖 ) · n𝑖 ) . (6) This is the coordinate transform used in the atlas-training stage and in the Schwarz solver before the learned decoder adds a bounded residual correction to the rigid frame map. As such, each chart is equipped with a different mapping to a Euclidean coordinate system pre-trained before the solver is applied for the boundary value problem. Unless PINN is used as the local solver, there is no additional training needed to solve the boundary value problem. 

2.1.2 Atlas, overlaps, and transition maps 

The atlas serves two roles here. Geometrically it represents the body by local volumetric parametrizations. Algorithmically, it provides the overlap graph and the coordinate transformations needed for local residual evaluation and inter-chart communication. An atlas is a collection of such charts whose physical images must cover the body, while overlapping is allowed. The overlapping nature of coordinate chart is leveraged such that it enables neighboring local PDE solves to exchange information without building a global volumetric mesh. On overlaps we define 

Ω𝑖 𝑗 := Ω 𝑖 ∩ Ω 𝑗 , bΩ𝑖 𝑗 := 𝜋 𝑖 (Ω𝑖 𝑗 ) ⊂ bΩ𝑖 , (7) and the corresponding transition map 

𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 := 𝜋 𝑗 ◦ 𝜑 𝑖 : bΩ𝑖 𝑗 → bΩ 𝑗 , 𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ) = 𝜑 𝑗 (𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 )) . (8) geometry-informed neural charts 5

The transition map 𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 identifies the same physical point through two neighboring coordinate systems. It is therefore the object that makes overlap consistency meaningful: if 𝑥 ∈ Ω𝑖 𝑗 and 𝑥 = 𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ), then 𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 ) is the coordinate in chart 

𝑗 representing that same 𝑥 . This local compatibility is the geometric counterpart of the chart-to-chart transmission used later by the alternating Schwarz solver. The overlaps also define the atlas adjacency graph, 

𝐺 A = (𝑉 A, 𝐸 A), 𝑉 A = {1, . . . , 𝑀 }, 𝐸 A = {( 𝑖, 𝑗 ) : 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗, Ω𝑖 𝑗 ≠ ∅} . (9) Here, 𝐺 A is the atlas overlap graph, 𝑉 A is the set of chart indices (graph vertices), and 𝐸 A is the set of edges connecting chart pairs with non-empty overlap. This graph is not merely a bookkeeping device; it defines the neighborhood structure used later in the Schwarz sweep and in the graph-coloring step that identifies non-overlapping chart groups for parallel updates. Figure 1 gives a schematic planar slice through this volumetric atlas. The paired arrows represent the chart maps 

𝜑 𝑖 and their local inverses 𝜋 𝑖 , illustrating the bidirectional correspondence between reference coordinates and physical space. Table 1 summarizes the notation used throughout the remainder of the paper. Table 1: Notation used in Section 2. Physical-space variables, chart-local reference variables, and global reference-ball variables are separated explicitly so that the reader can track which coordinate system is active at each step of the derivation. 

Group Symbol Role in the method Physical space 

Ω, 𝜕 Ω physical body and its boundary 

𝑥 physical-space point used in the governing PDE 

Ω𝑖 , Ω𝑖 𝑗 chart image and chart-overlap region in physical space 

𝑢 ( 𝑥 ), 𝑢 ℎ ( 𝑥 ) physical state field and the blended global field used for report-ing Chart-local reference 

bΩ𝑖 reference patch attached to chart 𝑖 

𝜻 local coordinate used to evaluate one chart-local network 

bΩ𝑖 𝑗 overlap region written in the coordinates of chart 𝑖 

b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ) chart-local state field defined on bΩ𝑖 

Global reference ball 

𝐵 3 = {𝝃 ∈ R3 : ∥𝝃 ∥ < 1} unit ball used only by the special global-map examples 

Ψ𝜃 (𝝃 ) learned or analytic global map from the reference ball to the physical domain Map operators 

𝜑 𝑖 , 𝜋 𝑖 chart map and its local inverse 

𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 = 𝜋 𝑗 ◦ 𝜑 𝑖 transition map from chart-𝑖 coordinates to chart- 𝑗 coordinates on an overlap 

J𝑖 = 𝐷 𝜻 𝜑 𝑖 , 𝑗 𝑖 = det J𝑖 Jacobian matrix and Jacobian determinant of chart 𝑖 𝜔 𝑖 partition-of-unity weight used in the global blend Vectors and boundary data 

n, bn𝑖 outward unit normal on a physical or reference boundary 

t𝑁 , tobs prescribed Neumann traction and observed traction 

t1𝑖 , t2𝑖 , n𝑖 orthonormal TNB frame at chart seed 𝑠 𝑖 (distinct from boundary normal) Shared solver quantities 𝜂, 𝜆 ∗ 𝜂 denotes global material or inverse parameters; 𝜆 ∗ denotes loss weights shared across charts 

Remark 1 (Post-processing) When a single global field is needed for post-processing, we use partition-of-unity weights 

{𝜔 𝑖 }𝑀 𝑖 =1 satisfying 

𝜔 𝑖 : Ω → [ 0, 1], supp (𝜔 𝑖 ) ⊂ Ω𝑖 ,

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 ) = 1. (10) For any chart-local quantity b𝑔 𝑖 , the blended global field is 

𝑔 ℎ (𝑥 ) =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 ) b𝑔 𝑖 (𝜋 𝑖 (𝑥 )) . (11) 6 WaiChing Sun a

2.2 Mapped PDE operator on a volumetric chart Let 𝒖 : Ω → R𝑞 be the physical state. 

∇𝑥 𝒖 (𝒙 ) ∈ R𝑞 ⊗ R3, (∇ 𝑥 𝒖 )𝛼𝑖 = 𝜕𝑢 𝛼 

𝜕𝑥 𝑖 

.

Here, 𝑞 denotes the number of components of the state field (e.g., 𝑞 = 1 for a scalar field and 𝑞 = 3 for 3D displacement). We write the physical PDE in divergence form as 

∇𝑥 · G(𝒙 , 𝒖 (𝒙 ), ∇𝑥 𝒖 (𝒙 ); 𝜼 ) + S(𝒙 , 𝒖 (𝒙 ), ∇𝑥 𝒖 (𝒙 ); 𝜼 ) = 0 in Ω, (12) where the divergence acts on the spatial index and 

G(𝒙 , 𝒖 , ∇𝒖 ; 𝜼 ) ∈ R𝑞 ⊗ R3, S(𝒙 , 𝒖 , ∇𝒖 ; 𝜼 ) ∈ R𝑞 .

Here, 𝜼 denotes the vector of model/material parameters (it may reduce to a scalar in special cases). Physical boundary conditions are written as 

𝒖 = 𝒖 𝐷 on Γ𝐷 , G(𝒙 , 𝒖 , ∇𝑥 𝒖 ; 𝜼 ) n = t𝑁 on Γ𝑁 , (13) with outward unit normal n. 

> Reference patch Physical patch

bΩ𝑖  

> 𝜻
> e1
> e2
> bn𝑖

Ω𝑖                       

> 𝑥 =𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )
> J𝑖 e1
> J𝑖 e2
> n𝑖
> 𝜑 𝑖
> J𝑖 =𝐷 𝜻 𝜑 𝑖
> Gradient pullback
> ∇𝑥 𝑢 =∇𝜻 b𝑢 𝑖 J−1
> 𝑖
> Piola flux
> bP𝑖 =𝑗 𝑖 bG𝑖 J−𝑇 𝑖
> Normal map
> n𝑖 =J−𝑇 𝑖 bn𝑖
> ∥J−𝑇 𝑖 bn𝑖 ∥

Fig. 2: Mapped-operator view on one chart. The left side shows the local reference patch (unit ball) with a regular grid; the center arrow represents the chart map 𝜑 𝑖 and its Jacobian J𝑖 ; the right side shows the corresponding physical patch with the grid deformed by the map. The formula cards highlight the three identities the implementation uses directly: gradient pullback, Piola-transformed flux, and normal mapping. On chart 𝑖 , let 𝜻 ∈ bΩ𝑖 denote the local reference coordinate and define the pulled-back state by 

b𝒖 𝑖 (𝜻 ) := 𝒖 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) . (14) The chain rule takes the form 

∇𝑥 𝒖 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) = ∇𝜻 b𝒖 𝑖 (𝜻 ) J𝑖 (𝜻 )−1. (15) The physical flux is first evaluated on the chart and then converted to a reference-space flux by the Piola transform (acting on the spatial index): 

bG𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) := G



𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ), b𝒖 𝑖 (𝜻 ), ∇𝜻 b𝒖 𝑖 (𝜻 )J𝑖 (𝜻 )−1; 𝜼 



, (16) 

bP𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) := 𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 ) bG𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) J𝑖 (𝜻 )−𝑇 . (17) The pulled-back source term is 

bS𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) := S



𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ), b𝒖 𝑖 (𝜻 ), ∇𝜻 b𝒖 𝑖 (𝜻 )J𝑖 (𝜻 )−1; 𝜼 



. (18) geometry-informed neural charts 7

We reserve the notation bP𝑖 for the Piola-transformed flux entering the reference-space divergence and bS𝑖 for the pulled-back source term, so the flux and source roles remain distinct throughout the derivation. With these definitions, the Piola identity ∇𝑥 · G = 𝑗 −1 

> 𝑖

∇𝜻 · ( 𝑗 𝑖 G J−𝑇 𝑖 ) = 𝑗 −1 

> 𝑖

∇𝜻 · bP𝑖 applied to (12) and multiplied through by 𝑗 𝑖 yields the mapped residual on the reference chart: 

bR𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) := ∇𝜻 · bP𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) + 𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 ) bS𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ), 𝜻 ∈ bΩ𝑖 . (19) For the Dirichlet boundary we use 

bB𝑖,𝐷 (𝜻 ) := b𝒖 𝑖 (𝜻 ) − 𝒖 𝐷 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) , 𝜻 ∈ bΓ𝑖,𝐷 := 𝜋 𝑖 (Γ𝐷 ∩ Ω𝑖 ). (20) For Neumann or traction conditions, if bn𝑖 (𝜻 ) is a reference outward normal on the relevant portion of 𝜕 bΩ𝑖 , the physical normal is 

n𝑖 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) = J𝑖 (𝜻 )−𝑇 bn𝑖 (𝜻 )∥J𝑖 (𝜻 )−𝑇 bn𝑖 (𝜻 )∥ , (21) and the pulled-back Neumann residual is 

bB𝑖, 𝑁 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) := bG𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜼 ) n𝑖 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) − t𝑁 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) , (22) where bG𝑖 is the physical flux from (16) and n𝑖 is the physical normal from (21), both evaluated at the chart-mapped point 

𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ). Table 2 summarizes the correspondence between physical-space operators and their chart-local counterparts. Table 2: Operator pullback summary. Each physical-space quantity on the left is expressed in chart-local reference coordinates on the right via the decoder map 𝜑 𝑖 and its Jacobian J𝑖 .                                                                                    

> Physical operator Reference-chart form Eq. State field 𝑢 (𝑥 )b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 )=𝑢 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ) ) (14) Gradient ∇𝑥 𝑢 ∇𝜻 b𝑢 𝑖 J−1
> 𝑖 (15) Flux G(𝑥, 𝑢, ∇𝑢 )bG𝑖 =G(𝜑 𝑖 ,b𝑢 𝑖 ,∇𝜻 b𝑢 𝑖 J−1
> 𝑖 )(16) Piola flux bP𝑖 𝑗 𝑖 bG𝑖 J−𝑇 𝑖 (17) Source S(𝑥, 𝑢, ∇𝑢 )bS𝑖 =S(𝜑 𝑖 ,b𝑢 𝑖 ,∇𝜻 b𝑢 𝑖 J−1
> 𝑖 )(18) PDE residual bR𝑖 =∇𝜻 ·bP𝑖 +𝑗 𝑖 bS𝑖 (19) Outward normal nJ−𝑇 𝑖 bn𝑖 /∥ J−𝑇 𝑖 bn𝑖 ∥(21) Dirichlet BC b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ) − 𝑢 𝐷 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ) ) (20) Neumann BC bG𝑖 n𝑖 −t𝑁 (22)

Remark 2 (Global maps for simply connected domains) In the special case where a single low-distortion volumetric parametrization Ψ𝜃 : 𝐵 3 → Ω is feasible, the atlas reduces to one chart. The ellipsoid verification (Example 1) uses this special case with an analytic map; the rabbit and torus benchmarks do not. Details of the learned global-map training objective and algorithm are given in Appendix C. 

3 Solvers on a fixed atlas 

This section explains how a fixed neural atlas and the corresponding mapped operators defined in Section 2 is used to solve PDEs while bypassing the meshing procedure that renders the geometry. We use a physics-informed neural network (Section 3.1) and a finite-element method (Section 3.2) to demonstrate how the neural atlas can be used to solve PDEs in a domain-decomposed setting. In principle, the atlas framework may also be extended to other PDE solvers, such as smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) or the material point method, but this is outside the scope of the present study. 8 WaiChing Sun a

3.1 Schwarz alternating physics-informed neural network on a fixed atlas After the atlas is obtained, its coordinate charts can be used to decompose the spatial domain for the PDE solver. In this setting, each chart becomes a local subproblem, each overlap Ω𝑖 𝑗 acts as an artificial interface, and each transition map 𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 provides a consistent way to compare neighboring chart fields [11]. For coordinate-chart PINNs, this setting enables us to formulate residual minimization in reference coordinates for each coordinate chart. The overlap graph 

𝐺 A identifies which neighboring charts must exchange traces. Compared with a single global PINN, this structure improves locality in approximation, conditioning, and sampling. Let the state network on chart 𝑖 be 

b𝑢 𝑖 (· ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) : bΩ𝑖 → R𝑞 (23) where 𝜃 𝑖 denotes the trainable parameters of the chart-𝑖 network. The local physical representation reads, 

𝑢 𝑖 (𝒙 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) := b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜋 𝑖 (𝒙 ); 𝜃 𝑖 ), 𝑥 ∈ Ω𝑖 . (24) For overlaps, the artificial Schwarz boundary of chart 𝑖 is 

Γ𝑖 := 𝜕 Ω𝑖 \ 𝜕 Ω, Γ𝑖 𝑗 := Γ 𝑖 ∩ Ω 𝑗 , N(𝑖 ) := { 𝑗 ≠ 𝑖 : Γ𝑖 𝑗 ≠ ∅} . (25) In reference coordinates, the corresponding sets are bΓ𝑖 𝑗 := 𝜋 𝑖 (Γ𝑖 𝑗 ) ⊂ bΩ𝑖 and bΓ𝑖,𝜕 Ω := 𝜋 𝑖 (𝜕 Ω ∩ 𝜕 Ω𝑖 ), which are the domains on which interface and physical-boundary penalties are sampled in the loss below. The sets Γ𝑖 𝑗 play the same conceptual role as Schwarz interfaces in classical overlapping domain decomposition: they are not physical boundaries of the PDE, but the internal regions where chart-local solutions must agree strongly enough to define a coherent global field. In the chart setting the same overlap also provides the transition map 𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 needed to compare chart-local predictions in compatible coordinates. In the rabbit implementation, interface samples are drawn from points whose stored atlas membership includes both charts, and the rigid local coordinates (6) are evaluated in both neighboring frames before the chart-to-chart penalties are formed. In Schwarz alternating method [32], one would impose Dirichlet, Neumann, or Robin data on these artificial interfaces and solve each local problem to completion before moving to the next subdomain. In the Schwarz PINN model, neighbor networks are frozen while chart 𝑖 is updated, and compatibility is enforced by sampled penalties on the overlap rather than by exact boundary imposition. Writing 𝜃 (𝑘, fr ) 

> 𝑗

for the frozen neighbor state available during sweep 𝑘 , the interface-value term is sampled directly from the neighboring local field 𝑢 𝑗 , not from the globally blended field 𝑢 ℎ. This distinction is important for reproducibility: in the released solver, Schwarz transmission is chart-to-chart, while the global blend is used only for diagnostics and post-processing after a proposed sweep. 

J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, iv

=∑︁  

> 𝑗 ∈N(𝑖 )

E𝜻 ∼bΓ𝑖 𝑗 

b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) − b𝑢 𝑗 



𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 ); 𝜃 (𝑘, fr )

> 𝑗

 2

. (26) To ensure continuity, one may also penalizes projected normal-flux mismatch. Let n𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 ) denote the outward unit normal of 𝜕 Ω𝑖 at the physical point 𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ), restricted to the interface Γ𝑖 𝑗 . Define 

𝑞 𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) := n𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 ) · ∇ 𝑥 𝑢 𝑖 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 ); 𝜃 𝑖 ) , (27) and 

J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, if

=∑︁  

> 𝑗 ∈N(𝑖 )

E𝜻 ∼bΓ𝑖 𝑗 



𝑞 𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) − 𝑞 𝑗 



𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 ); 𝜃 (𝑘, fr )

> 𝑗

 2

. (28) For completeness, one may also expose a Robin-style variant,i.e., 

J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, rb

=∑︁  

> 𝑗 ∈N(𝑖 )

E𝜻 ∼bΓ𝑖 𝑗 



𝜆 𝑅 

b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) − b𝑢 𝑗 



𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 ); 𝜃 (𝑘, fr )

> 𝑗

 

+ 𝑞 𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) − 𝑞 𝑗 



𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 ); 𝜃 (𝑘, fr )

> 𝑗

 2

, (29) This option is nevertheless not exercised in our numerical experiments. At Schwarz sweep 𝑘 , the local chart objective is therefore 

J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

(𝜃 𝑖 ; 𝜂 ) =𝜆 pde E𝜻 ∼bΩ𝑖 

h

∥bR𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜂 )∥ 22

i

+ 𝜆 bc E𝜻 ∼bΓ𝑖,𝜕 Ω

h

∥bB𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜂 )∥ 22

i

+ 𝜆 iv J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, iv

+ 𝜆 if eJ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, if

+ 𝜆 ov J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, ov

+ 𝜆 data J𝑖, data (𝜃 𝑖 , 𝜂 ), (30) geometry-informed neural charts 9

where eJ(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, if

denotes either the projected-flux penalty (28) or the Robin residual (29), and J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖, ov

denotes the optional volumetric overlap penalty. The practical default is the projected-flux penalty with frozen-neighbor traces. This distinction matters: the present solver is Schwarz-inspired in its transmission logic, but each chart update is still carried out by optimizer steps on a neural loss, not by an exact local PDE solve. One sweep of the atlas solver can be written abstractly as 

Θ(𝑘 +1) = 𝔖 



Θ(𝑘 ) ; 𝜂 



, Θ(𝑘 ) := (𝜃 (𝑘 ) 

> 1

, . . . , 𝜃 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑀

), (31) where 𝔖 denotes one multiplicative Schwarz pass over the chart set. In the PINN solver, multiplicativity is enforced on every overlapping pair: charts updated later in the sweep use the most recently accepted states of previously updated neighbors. Charts that do not overlap are assigned to the same graph color and can be updated concurrently on available accelerator backends without violating the frozen-neighbor assumption. The resulting algorithm is therefore a multiplicative Schwarz scheme with restricted within-color parallelism, rather than a fully additive update. The color groups used in Algorithm 1 are derived from a graph-coloring of the chart-overlap adjacency matrix: two charts may share a color only if they do not overlap, which makes within-color updates independent for the purposes of the frozen-neighbor Schwarz step. After an accepted sweep, the global blended field is 

𝑢 (𝑘 ) 

> ℎ

(𝑥 ) =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 ) 𝑢 𝑖 (𝑥 ; 𝜃 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

). (32) where 𝑀 is the total number of charts in the atlas.       

> (a) Overlapping chart images
> Ω
> Ω𝑖 Ω𝑗
> Ω𝑖 𝑗
> Γ𝑖 𝑗
> Γ𝑗𝑖  neighbor trace interface loss
> active chart 𝑖 frozen neighbor 𝑗
> (b) One multiplicative sweep
> 1. Snapshot
> save Θ(𝑘 )
> rollback state
> refresh pools
> 2. Local updates
> update one chart
> or color group
> neighbors frozen
> 3. Global check
> accept
> rollback
> PDE interface rel-𝐿 2
> 4. Checkpoint
> blend field
> score sweep
> continue
> multiplicative on true overlaps; parallel within non-overlapping color groups

Fig. 3: Conceptual and algorithmic view of fixed-atlas SA-PINN coupling. Panel (a) shows two overlapping chart images inside the physical body. The overlap Ω𝑖 𝑗 induces the artificial interfaces Γ𝑖 𝑗 and Γ𝑗𝑖 on which neighboring chart solutions exchange temporary transmission data during training. Panel (b) shows one multiplicative Schwarz sweep: the solver snapshots the full chart state, updates one active chart or non-overlapping color group while neighbor states are detached, evaluates global residual and interface diagnostics, and then accepts the sweep or restores the previous state. Algorithm 1 records the core training loop. The key point is that acceptance is evaluated at the sweep level, not chart by chart. As such, a candidate sweep is formed first, then accepted or rejected using global diagnostics. Consequently, later chart updates within the same sweep are interpreted in the context of the current provisional state, and the solver commits a new iterate only after the sweep-level decision is made. Parallel updates are permitted only within non-overlapping graph-color groups; no two charts in the same color share an overlap interface. This coloring preserves independent within-color updates while retaining multiplicative information transfer across true overlap pairs through the sweep ordering. 10 WaiChing Sun a

Algorithm 1 Fixed-atlas SA-PINN training by multiplicative Schwarz sweeps 

Inputs: frozen atlas A; chart-local networks {b𝑢 𝑖 (· ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) } 𝑀 𝑖 =1;optional global parameters 𝜂 ; local optimizers; sweep budget 𝐾 ; local-step budget 𝑁 loc 

Outputs: selected checkpoint { 𝜃 𝑖 } 𝑀 𝑖 =1 and blended field 𝑢 ℎ

Initialization 

1: Initialize chart parameters 𝜃 𝑖 and any trainable global parameters 𝜂 

2: Evaluate the initial blended field and initialize checkpoint metrics 3: for 𝑘 = 0, . . . , 𝐾 − 1 do 

Pre-sweep setup 

4: Store a snapshot of the full chart state Θ(𝑘 )

5: Refresh sweep-level sampling pools and effective interface weights 6: for each color group 𝑔 from the graph-coloring of the chart-overlap adjacency matrix do 

Local chart updates 

7: for each active chart 𝑖 ∈ 𝑔 sequentially, or concurrently when charts in 𝑔 do not overlap do 

8: for 𝑛 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 loc do 

9: Sample PDE, physical-boundary, interface, and optional supervision points on chart 𝑖 

10: Query neighbors only through frozen predictions on sampled overlap points 11: Assemble the local loss J(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

in (30) 12: Update 𝜃 𝑖 while all neighbor contributions remain detached 13: end for 

14: end for 

15: end for 

Global acceptance test 

16: Form the proposed blended field by (32) 17: Evaluate global PDE, boundary, interface, and relative-𝐿 2 diagnostics 18: if the sweep violates the trust-region admissibility test then 

19: Restore the pre-sweep snapshot Θ(𝑘 ) and reduce the learning rate 20: else 

21: Accept the sweep and refresh checkpoint statistics 22: Update adaptive weights if enabled 23: end if 

24: end for 

25: return the selected checkpoint and its blended field 𝑢 ℎ

3.2 Chart-local finite-element solver on a fixed atlas This section shows that Galerkin finite element can also be cast as interchangeable chart-local solvers that consume the same geometric data structures and Schwarz coupling protocol, differing only in the choice of trial space and the mechanism by which the local subproblem is solved. Our starting point is the observation that the mapped residual (19) and the Piola-transformed flux (17) are coordinate-level identities: they hold for any admissible trial function on the reference chart, regardless of whether that trial function is a neural network b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) or a piecewise-linear finite-element expansion b𝑢 ℎ𝑖 (𝜻 ) = Í𝑎 𝑁 𝑎 (𝜻 ) 𝑑 𝑖,𝑎 with nodal coefficients d𝑖 ∈ R𝑛 𝑖 ×𝑞 and standard Lagrange shape functions 𝑁 𝑎 . The Galerkin weak form on chart 𝑖 reads: find b𝑢 ℎ𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 ℎ𝑖 such that 

∫

> bΩ𝑖

(∇ 𝜻 𝑁 𝑎 )𝑇 bP𝑖 (𝜻 ; b𝑢 ℎ𝑖 ) 𝑑 𝜻 =

∫

> bΩ𝑖

𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 ) bS𝑖 (𝜻 ; b𝑢 ℎ𝑖 ) 𝑁 𝑎 𝑑 𝜻 ∀ 𝑁 𝑎 ∈ 𝑉 ℎ𝑖 , (33) where bP𝑖 is the same Piola flux (17) that the PINN evaluates pointwise, and the reference-domain integrals are evaluated by standard Gauss quadrature on each tetrahedron. This is the standard Bubnov–Galerkin statement pulled back to the reference chart through the map 𝜑 𝑖 ; the only non-standard ingredient is that the metric coefficients J𝑖 and 

𝑗 𝑖 are supplied by the frozen atlas rather than by a conventional body-fitted mesh. For linear elliptic operators, (33) yields a sparse symmetric positive-definite system whose assembly and solution follow the standard finite-element workflow. For nonlinear constitutive laws—hyperelasticity, rate-independent plasticity, or coupled multi-physics—the weak form yields a nonlinear residual 

R𝑖 (d𝑖 ) = fint ,𝑖 (d𝑖 ) − fext ,𝑖 = 0, (34) which is solved by Newton–Raphson iteration. The consistent tangent stiffness K𝑖 = 𝜕 R𝑖 /𝜕 d𝑖 is assembled through the same automatic-differentiation infrastructure used by the PINN: PyTorch’s autograd differentiates the mapped constitutive operator bP𝑖 with respect to the deformation gradient, and the resulting material tangent modulus C𝑖 =geometry-informed neural charts 11 

𝜕 bP𝑖 /𝜕 F is contracted with shape-function gradients at each quadrature point in the standard fashion [1, 2]. For history-dependent constitutive laws (e.g., the smooth return mapping of Appendix E), the autograd tape records the full algorithmic path through the return-mapping corrector, so the consistent algorithmic tangent is obtained exactly without manual derivation of the elasto-plastic modulus. The reference domain bΩ𝑖 ⊂ [− 𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ]3 is discretized by a structured hexahedral grid with Freudenthal six-tetrahedron decomposition, yielding (𝑛 cells + 1)3 nodes and 6 𝑛 3cells P1 tetrahedra per chart. This structured mesh is generated once per chart from the support radius 𝑟 𝑖 alone, with no surface-conforming mesh generation step—the geometry is encoded entirely through the chart map 𝜑 𝑖 and its Jacobian J𝑖 , which enter the integrands of (33). Nodes whose reference-domain images fall outside the physical body (detected by the frozen SDF) are excluded from the assembly: elements with all nodes outside the body contribute zero to the chart-local stiffness and load vectors, and partially exterior elements are retained with their interior quadrature points contributing through the standard mapped integrands. The mesh generation cost is therefore 𝑂 (𝑛 3cells ) per chart and is independent of the geometric complexity of 𝜕 Ω; all geometric information enters through the frozen decoder and SDF evaluations at quadrature points. 

3.2.1 Schwarz coupling for the FEM solver 

Inter-chart coupling follows the same multiplicative Schwarz procedure as that of the PINN (Section 3.1). The major departure is that the admissible solution of each chart is obtained through a gradient-based solver rather than searched in a non-convex landscape. This simplification leads to the classical multiplicative Schwarz method [11] rather than its PINN-relaxed variant. This setting is helpful for problems with history-dependent constitutive laws, where each local solve must reach equilibrium before internal variables are updated. Because approximate gradient-descent solutions cannot guarantee this, the Schwarz PINN used in this study could potentially corrupt the stored plastic state. At Schwarz sweep 𝑘 , the solver visits charts by color groups from the overlap adjacency graph. For each active chart 𝑖 :1. Schwarz interface nodes 𝜻 𝑎 ∈ bΓ𝑖 𝑗 receive Dirichlet values from the current solution on neighboring chart 𝑗 :

𝑑 𝑖,𝑎 ← b𝑢 ℎ𝑗 



𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 𝑎 ); d(𝑘 )

> 𝑗



, 𝑎 ∈ I𝑖 𝑗 , (35) where 𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 is the chart transition map and I𝑖 𝑗 denotes the index set of chart-𝑖 boundary nodes that lie within chart 𝑗 ’s support. 2. Physical boundary conditions (Dirichlet or Neumann) are imposed on nodes 𝜻 𝑎 ∈ bΓ𝑖,𝜕 Ω via the mapped boundary operators (20)–(22). 3. The chart-local residual (34) is assembled and solved by Newton–Raphson for d(𝑘 +1) 

> 𝑖

.For problems with history-dependent constitutive laws (e.g., the elastoplastic forward BVP of Example 3), internal variables—accumulated plastic strain, back-stress tensors—are stored at each quadrature point within each chart and updated locally during the Newton iteration. Only displacement traces are exchanged across chart boundaries; internal-variable fields remain private to each chart. This locality is a direct consequence of the multiplicative decomposition 

F = F𝑒 F𝑝 : the plastic state is determined by the local deformation history, and Schwarz coupling need enforce only displacement continuity at interfaces for the global equilibrium problem to be well-posed. 

Remark 3 (Tangent computation and operator modularity) The autograd-based tangent assembly deserves emphasis because it decouples the solver infrastructure from the constitutive law. In a conventional finite-element code, each new material model requires a hand-derived consistent tangent modulus; errors in this derivation are a well-known source of convergence failures [2]. Here, the chart-local residual R𝑖 (d𝑖 ) is assembled as a standard PyTorch computation graph, and the tangent K𝑖 = 𝜕 R𝑖 /𝜕 d𝑖 is obtained by reverse-mode differentiation through the entire constitutive path— including, for plasticity, the smooth return-mapping corrector. Adding a new constitutive law therefore requires only a forward evaluation of the stress; the consistent tangent follows automatically. This is the same automatic-differentiation principle exploited in differentiable simulation [33], applied here within the atlas-based Schwarz framework. 12 WaiChing Sun a

Algorithm 2 Chart-local P1 FEM solver with multiplicative Schwarz coupling 

Inputs: frozen atlas A = { ( 𝜑 𝑖 , J𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ) } 𝑀 𝑖 =1; overlap graph 𝐺 A with coloring; mesh parameter 𝑛 cells ; loading schedule { 𝛿 (𝑡 ) } 𝑁 step  

> 𝑡 =1

; Schwarz sweep budget 𝐾 ;Newton tolerance 𝜖 NR ; constitutive law bP𝑖 (·) 

Outputs: chart-local nodal solutions {d𝑖 } 𝑀 𝑖 =1 and internal-variable fields 1: Generate structured P1 tetrahedral meshes on each bΩ𝑖 ⊂ [− 𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ]3

2: Precompute shape-function gradients, quadrature weights, J𝑖 , 𝑗 𝑖 at each Gauss point 3: Identify boundary node sets: bΓ𝑖,𝜕 Ω (physical BC) and bΓ𝑖 𝑗 (Schwarz interface) for each chart pair 4: Initialize d(0) 

> 𝑖

= 0, internal variables ← elastic reference state 5: for 𝑡 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 step do ⊲ Incremental load stepping 6: Update external load 𝛿 (𝑡 ) and corresponding physical boundary data 7: for 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 do ⊲ Multiplicative Schwarz sweeps 8: for each color group 𝑔 from the overlap graph coloring do 

9: for each chart 𝑖 ∈ 𝑔 do 

10: Impose physical BCs: 𝑑 𝑖,𝑎 ← 𝑢 𝐷 ( 𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 𝑎 ) ) for 𝑎 ∈ bΓ𝑖,𝜕 Ω

11: Impose Schwarz BCs: 𝑑 𝑖,𝑎 ← b𝑢 ℎ𝑗 ( 𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 𝑎 ); d(𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

) for 𝑎 ∈ I𝑖 𝑗 , 𝑗 ∈ N(𝑖 )

12: Newton–Raphson: 

13: Assemble R𝑖 (d𝑖 ) and tangent K𝑖 from mapped weak form (33) 14: Solve K𝑖 Δd𝑖 = −R𝑖 ; update d𝑖 ← d𝑖 + Δd𝑖 

15: Repeat until ∥R𝑖 ∥/∥ fext ,𝑖 ∥ < 𝜖 NR 

16: end for 

17: end for 

18: Evaluate inter-chart displacement jump max (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐺 A ∥d𝑖 − d 𝑗 ∥Γ𝑖 𝑗 

19: end for 

20: Update history-dependent internal variables (plastic strain, back-stress) 21: Store checkpoint if requested 22: end for 

23: Form global blended field 𝑢 ℎ ( 𝑥 ) = Í𝑖 𝜔 𝑖 ( 𝑥 ) b𝑢 ℎ𝑖 ( 𝜋 𝑖 ( 𝑥 ); d𝑖 ) via partition of unity 

3.2.2 Comparison of PINN and FEM algorithms 

Table 3 compares the two chart-local solver families on atlases built by the same pipeline. A important key is that that the atlas construction pipeline (SDF learning, chart seeding, decoder training, quality gating) and the Schwarz coupling logic (overlap graph, color groups, interface transmission) are shared infrastructure that both solvers consume without modification. Once the atlas passes its quality gates, either Algorithm 1 or Algorithm 2 may be applied, and new chart-local discretization families—spectral elements, isogeometric patches, or neural operators—could be introduced by supplying only a local trial-function class and the corresponding assembly or evaluation routine. This modularity is a direct consequence of the separation between geometry (encoded in the atlas) and physics (encoded in the chart-local solver), and it is the primary architectural contribution of the present work. Table 3: Comparisons between the two chart-local solver families on the atlas pipeline. Both solvers share the same decoder architecture, overlap graph structure 𝐺 A, Schwarz transmission logic, and partition-of-unity blending (32); the chart count is a user parameter. 

Chart-local PINN (Alg. 1) Chart-local FEM (Alg. 2) Trial function Neural network b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ; 𝜃 𝑖 ) P1 expansion Í𝑎 𝑁 𝑎 𝑑 𝑖,𝑎 

Local solve Approximate (gradient descent) Exact (Newton–Raphson to tolerance) Mesh generation None (meshfree collocation) Structured Freudenthal tets on [− 𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ]3

Convergence guarantee Empirical 𝑂 (ℎ2 ) for P1 on smooth solutions Nonlinear operators Pointwise autograd residual Requires tangent assembly per Newton step Schwarz coupling Penalty-based on sampled overlaps Dirichlet trace injection at interface nodes Gradient w.r.t. parameters Direct (backpropagation) Implicit function theorem geometry-informed neural charts 13 

4 Atlas constructions 

This section details the workflow that produces a frozen atlas. It also describes the quality gates that certify the atlas before any PDE solver is invoked and the chart-local solver architectures. Architectural specifications and the loss functions used to train the coordinate charts are collected in Appendix B–D. Solver stabilization heuristics are given in Appendix F to ensure reproducibility. All neural networks are implemented in PyTorch [34] with automatic differentiation for both PDE residuals and chart Jacobians. The atlas, including the signed distance function, coordinate charts, decoder maps, mask weights, and overlap structure, is constructed and frozen before any PDE solver is used. Geometric quality gates ensure that if a benchmark fails after passing geometry quality control, the failure can be attributed to the PDE solver or coupling logic. We use the Stanford Bunny geometry as a representative test bed. 4.1 Atlas construction pipeline The geometry stage follows a four-step pipeline, each producing a mathematical object required by the downstream solver. The pipeline is designed so that every stage can be verified independently: the SDF defines the domain, the seeds and frames initialize the charts, the decoders and masks refine them, and the quality gates accept or reject the result before any PDE solver is invoked. 

4.1.1 Volumetric signed-distance modeling 

The construction of the atlas requires a representation of geometry to parametrize the coordinate charts. In this work, we leverage the signed distance function as the input to construct the atlas. This signed distance function can be obtained externally or can be recovered from other forms of representations, such as meshes, point clouds, or parametric surfaces. In this work, we train a neural signed distance function 𝑠 𝜗 : R3 → R from surface samples with oriented normals. The learned level set defines the computational domain and its boundary: 

𝑠 𝜗 : R3 → R, Ω ≈ { 𝑥 ∈ R3 : 𝑠 𝜗 (𝑥 ) < 0}, 𝜕 Ω ≈ { 𝑥 ∈ R3 : 𝑠 𝜗 (𝑥 ) = 0}. (36) The SDF serves two roles that a surface mesh alone cannot provide: (i) it furnishes a continuous inside/outside classifier for chart-seed acceptance and domain-containment losses, and (ii) its gradient field yields approximate surface normals for chart-frame initialization, both without the combinatorial complexity of watertight mesh repair. The training loss combines four objectives—surface fit, normal alignment, Eikonal regularization (∥∇ 𝑠 𝜗 ∥ − 1)2, and sign supervision via offset probes—whose explicit forms are given in Appendix D (Eqs. (65)–(66)). 

4.1.2 Seed placement and local frames 

The domain is covered by 𝑀 overlapping ball charts, each anchored at a seed 𝑐 𝑖 with an orthonormal frame 

Q𝑖 = [t1,𝑖 t2,𝑖 n𝑖 ] and support radius 𝑟 𝑖 . Seeds are accepted only where 𝑠 𝜗 (𝑐 𝑖 ) < 0. The choice of ball-shaped reference domains bΩ𝑖 ⊂ R3 provides an isotropic reference metric that avoids directional bias in collocation sampling and stabilizes Jacobian conditioning. Each physical point 𝑥 is expressed in chart-local coordinates via the rigid frame projection defined in (6). A point belongs to chart 𝑖 when it satisfies the distance-based membership criterion 

𝑑 𝑖 (𝑥 ) = ∥𝑥 − 𝑐 𝑖 ∥2, 𝜒 𝑖 (𝑥 ) = 1



𝑑 𝑖 (𝑥 ) ≤ ( 1 + 𝛼 ) min  

> 𝑗

𝑑 𝑗 (𝑥 )



, (37) where 𝛼 > 0 controls the overlap fraction: larger 𝛼 increases the communication bandwidth of the Schwarz iteration at the cost of additional per-chart evaluations, while smaller 𝛼 reduces overlap but may leave gaps in the partition of unity. Bijectivity is not guaranteed by construction; it is monitored a posteriori through the determinant barrier and foldover gates described below. 14 WaiChing Sun a

4.1.3 Decoder and mask training 

The abstract chart map 𝜑 𝑖 introduced in Section 2 is realized as a rigid affine frame augmented by a learned residual: 

Φ𝑖 (𝜻 ) = 𝑐 𝑖 + 𝜁 1t1,𝑖 + 𝜁 2t2,𝑖 + 𝜁 3n𝑖 + 𝑎 𝑖 𝑟 𝑖 N𝑖 (𝜻 /𝑟 𝑖 ), (38) where N𝑖 is a tanh MLP and 𝑎 𝑖 = 0.20 tanh (raw scale ) is a learned residual amplitude. This design is central to the atlas construction: at initialization the residual vanishes, so each chart starts as a rigid ball with det J𝑖 > 0 everywhere. Training then deforms the chart to conform to the local geometry, while the bounded amplitude 𝑎 𝑖 𝑟 𝑖 prevents the residual from overwhelming the affine frame and introducing foldover. The decoder is paired with a mask network 

𝑀 𝑖 that produces validity logits and, through them, both a hard membership probability and smooth partition-of-unity weights: 

ℓ𝑖 (𝜻 ) = 𝑀 𝑖 (𝜻 /𝑟 𝑖 ), 𝑝 𝑖 (𝑥 ) = 𝜎  ℓ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 (𝑥 )) , 𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 ) = exp (ℓ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 (𝑥 ))) 

Í 𝑗 exp (ℓ𝑗 (𝜻 𝑗 (𝑥 ))) . (39) The sigmoid output 𝑝 𝑖 serves as a differentiable chart-membership classifier for collocation-point assignment, while the softmax weights 𝜔 𝑖 provide the smooth blending coefficients needed by the Schwarz coupling and the global partition of unity. The decoder and mask networks are trained jointly with a composite atlas loss 

Latlas = 𝜆 rec /dom Lrec /dom + 𝜆 mask Lmask + 𝜆 ov Lov + 𝜆 jac Ljac + 𝜆 cov Lcov , (40) whose five terms penalize reconstruction error ( Lrec ) or domain-containment violation ( Ldom ), mask misclassification (Lmask ), overlap inconsistency between neighboring charts ( Lov ), non-positive Jacobian determinants ( Ljac ), and insufficient coverage ( Lcov ), respectively. The surface-based term Lrec is used when point-cloud data are available; the volumetric variant Ldom extends the decoder into the interior using the SDF as a containment oracle. Explicit functional forms for each component are given in Appendix D (Eqs. (67)–(72)). 

4.1.4 Quality gates 

The frozen-atlas philosophy requires a binary accept/reject decision before any PDE solver is invoked, rather than soft regularization that could leave residual geometric defects for the solver to absorb. The atlas is accepted only if the following metrics lie within prescribed bands: 

𝑔 cov = P𝑥 ∼𝑋 

h

max  

> 𝑖

𝑝 𝑖 (𝑥 ) > 𝜏 cov 

i

, 𝑔 ov = E𝑥 ∈𝑋 ov 

∥Φ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 (𝑥 )) − Φ 𝑗 (𝜻 𝑗 (𝑥 ))∥ 2

 ,𝑔 fold = 1

𝑁 𝐽 ∑︁ 𝑖, 𝜻 

1{det 𝐷 Φ𝑖 (𝜻 ) ≤ 0} , (41) 

𝑔 rmse = ©«

E𝑥 ∼𝑋 



> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 )Φ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 (𝑥 )) − 𝑥 

> 22

ª®¬

> 1/2

. (42) Here 𝑔 cov measures the fraction of domain points covered by at least one chart, 𝑔 ov quantifies the mean pairwise transition-map discrepancy in overlap regions, 𝑔 fold records the fraction of Jacobian-evaluation points with non-positive determinant, and 𝑔 rmse gives the partition-of-unity-weighted reconstruction accuracy. Failed gates trigger iterative refinement of chart seeds, support radii, decoder states, and mask parameters. 

4.1.5 Benchmark performance on Stanford Bunny atlas 

To verify that the frozen atlas provides well-conditioned coordinate charts, we conduct a numerical experiment on the Stanford Bunny geometry [35], a standard benchmark used for meshing. In this example, the unit ball is used as the reference domain to avoid edges and corners of the 3D cube, which are only 𝐶 0-continuous. Table 4 and Figure 4 report four categories of quantitative diagnostics for the canonical 12-chart rabbit atlas, computed on two sample populations per chart: (i) membership-filtered points (the physical-domain samples actually used by the solver, 1,500–5,000 per chart) and (ii) 5,000 dense uniform samples over the full reference ball (including regions outside the body). geometry-informed neural charts 15 

Jacobian determinant histograms. On the physical domain, all 12 charts maintain strictly positive Jacobian deter-minants (min 𝑖 min 𝜻 𝑗 𝑖 > 0; Table 4, columns 2–4), confirming zero foldover within the region where the PDE is evaluated. The per-chart distributions (Figure 4a) cluster between 3 and 8, reflecting the volume expansion from the reference ball to the irregularly shaped physical patches. On the full reference ball, five charts (0, 1, 2, 7, 11) exhibit negative determinants at 0.3%–5.6% of samples (Table 4, columns 5–7); these degenerate regions lie outside the body surface and are filtered by the SDF rejection step before any PDE collocation or finite-element assembly. 

Distortion and conditioning. The 95th-percentile condition numbers 𝜅 (J𝑖 ) = 𝜎 1/𝜎 3 range from 2.2 (Chart 6) to 9.5 (Chart 7) on the physical domain, with a chart-averaged mean of 7.0 (Figure 4b). Charts 4 and 6, whose seeds lie in geometrically simple regions (torso), have 𝜅 95 < 2.5; charts near thin features (ears, tail) exhibit moderately higher distortion. No chart reaches 𝜅 95 > 15 on the physical domain, confirming that the rigid-frame-plus-residual decoder design (Eq. (38)) controls distortion without explicit isotropy regularization. 

Coverage and overlap volume. Coverage is 100%: every surface point belongs to at least one chart. The overlap degree distribution (Figure 4c) shows that 80% of surface points belong to exactly one chart, 16.9% to two charts, 2.5% to three, and 0.5% to four or more. This means ∼20% of the body volume participates in Schwarz transmission, providing substantial overlap for interface coupling while keeping the majority of the domain single-chart (and therefore computationally inexpensive). The partition-of-unity entropy 𝐻 (𝜔 ) = − Í𝑖 𝜔 𝑖 ln 𝜔 𝑖 averages 0.048 across surface points, indicating that most points are dominated by a single chart weight close to one. 

Transition-map consistency. For each of the 37 overlapping chart pairs (𝑖, 𝑗 ), the round-trip error ∥𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 (𝑥 )) − 

𝜑 𝑗 (𝜻 𝑗 (𝑥 ))∥ is evaluated at shared membership points (Figure 4d). The overall mean is 2 .62 × 10 −2, and 35 of 37 pairs have mean error below 4 × 10 −2. The single outlier pair (4, 6) has only one shared point and a consistency error of 1 .55 × 10 −1; this pair contributes negligibly to the global solution because its overlap region is vanishingly small. These transition errors are the atlas-level analogue of patch-interface mismatch in multi-patch IGA, and their magnitude is consistent with the downstream Schwarz coupling successfully driving inter-chart agreement to the 10 −2

level observed in the PDE solution (Table 6). Table 4: Atlas quality diagnostics for the canonical 12-chart rabbit atlas. Membership-filtered evaluates at surface points assigned to each chart; full ball samples the entire reference domain including regions outside the body. Foldover is the fraction of samples with det J𝑖 ≤ 0.                                                                                       

> Membership-filtered Full reference ball Chart ¯𝑗 𝑖 𝜅 95 fold% min 𝑗 𝑖 𝜅 95 fold% 04.95 9.16 0.00 −3.24 14.09 5.60 14.97 6.72 0.00 −0.40 6.74 0.74 24.73 7.71 0.00 −6.38 6.69 2.18 34.87 8.90 0.00 1.40 6.78 0.00 44.34 2.37 0.00 1.74 2.42 0.00 55.30 7.61 0.00 0.70 8.49 0.00 64.38 2.21 0.00 1.82 2.13 0.00 75.00 9.49 0.00 −0.55 9.68 0.34 85.08 7.22 0.00 0.48 9.31 0.00 95.47 7.29 0.00 0.86 8.86 0.00 10 4.78 6.65 0.00 0.35 6.44 0.00 11 5.04 8.98 0.00 −1.34 13.51 2.18 Avg 4.91 7.03 0.00 −0.38 7.93 0.92

Remark 4 (Chart-local solvers and CompactChartNet) Two chart-local architectures are used for the rabbit Poisson benchmark. The dense baseline is a 64 × 4 tanh MLP per chart. The compact alternative, CompactChartNet , replaces each monolithic chart network with 9 sub-seeds, one 16 WaiChing Sun a0 2 4 6 8

det(J) 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

3.5 

4.0 

> Density

(a) Jacobian determinant distribution 

> Chart 0
> Chart 1
> Chart 2
> Chart 3
> Chart 4
> Chart 5
> Chart 6
> Chart 7
> Chart 8
> Chart 9
> Chart 10
> Chart 11
> det J = 0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

Chart index 

2

4

6

8

10 

12 

> (J)

(b) Condition number (J) = 1/ 3

0 1 2 3 4 5 6

Number of charts covering a point 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

> Fraction of points (%)
> 80.0%
> 16.9%
> 2.5%

(c) Overlap degree distribution (coverage=100.0%) 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

Chart j 

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 

11                                                                                                                                     

> Chart i
> -n/a n/a 1.8e-02 3.9e-02 1.0e-02 4.0e-02 2.1e-02 n/a 1.1e-02 n/a 2.5e-02
> n/a -n/a n/a n/a 1.5e-02 n/a n/a 1.8e-02 1.6e-02 2.3e-02 n/a
> n/a n/a -2.8e-02 n/a n/a n/a 3.8e-02 3.5e-02 n/a 2.6e-02 2.6e-02
> 1.8e-02 n/a 2.8e-02 -2.6e-02 1.9e-02 n/a 2.6e-02 n/a 2.0e-02 2.7e-02 1.7e-02
> 3.9e-02 n/a n/a 2.6e-02 -2.2e-02 1.5e-01 3.3e-02 n/a n/a n/a 2.5e-02
> 1.0e-02 1.5e-02 n/a 1.9e-02 2.2e-02 -n/a 1.8e-02 2.2e-02 9.7e-03 n/a 2.0e-02
> 4.0e-02 n/a n/a n/a 1.5e-01 n/a -n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
> 2.1e-02 n/a 3.8e-02 2.6e-02 3.3e-02 1.8e-02 n/a -n/a n/a 3.1e-02 2.2e-02
> n/a 1.8e-02 3.5e-02 n/a n/a 2.2e-02 n/a n/a -1.1e-02 2.1e-02 2.4e-02
> 1.1e-02 1.6e-02 n/a 2.0e-02 n/a 9.7e-03 n/a n/a 1.1e-02 -1.6e-02 1.3e-02
> n/a 2.3e-02 2.6e-02 2.7e-02 n/a n/a n/a 3.1e-02 2.1e-02 1.6e-02 -n/a
> 2.5e-02 n/a 2.6e-02 1.7e-02 2.5e-02 2.0e-02 n/a 2.2e-02 2.4e-02 1.3e-02 n/a -

(d) Transition consistency ||phi_i - phi_j|| (mean=2.62e-02) 

0.00 

0.02 

0.04 

0.06 

0.08 

0.10 

0.12 

0.14 

> Mean error

Atlas Quality Verification Report 

Fig. 4: Atlas quality verification for the 12-chart rabbit atlas. (a) Jacobian determinant distributions per chart evaluated at membership-filtered points; all charts maintain det J𝑖 > 0. (b) Condition number 𝜅 (J𝑖 ) box plots per chart; median values range from 1.8 to 6.1. (c) Overlap degree distribution: 80% of surface points lie in exactly one chart. (d) Pairwise transition-map consistency error ∥𝜑 𝑖 − 𝜑 𝑗 ∥ (mean across 37 overlapping pairs: 2 .62 × 10 −2). 32 × 2 tanh subnet per sub-seed, and a softmax partition of unity with scale 𝜏 = 0.125 𝑟 𝑖 :

𝑢 chart (𝜻 ) =

8∑︁ 

𝑚 =0

𝜙 𝑚 (𝜻 ) 𝑢 𝑚 (𝜻 − 𝒔 𝑚 ), 𝜙 𝑚 (𝜻 ) = exp (−∥ 𝜻 − 𝒔 𝑚 ∥2/2𝜏 2)

Í𝑚 ′ exp (−∥ 𝜻 − 𝒔 𝑚 ′ ∥2/2𝜏 2) . (43) This localized construction produces smoother Schwarz convergence histories than the dense baseline. The same atlas pipeline also hosts a chart-local P1 FEM variant that reuses the decoder, mask, overlap graph, and Schwarz infrastructure, confirming that the atlas serves as a solver-independent geometric substrate. Solver stabilization em-ploys staged PDE-weight ramping, PCGrad [36] for gradient-conflict mitigation, and a trust-region filter that rejects Schwarz updates causing unacceptable error increases. Adaptive regularization heuristics for the overlap weight and CompactChartNet bandwidth are detailed in Appendix F. 

5 Numerical experiments on partial differential equations 

The five examples are sequence of verification exercises and capability tests. Example 1 (ellipsoid Poisson) verifies that the mapped operator is mathematically correct on analytic geometry with a known closed-form solution. Example 2 (rabbit Poisson) asks whether the framework can handle an arbitrary 3D shape—imported from scan data—without a unified volumetric mesh, and cross-validates the atlas by running both a PINN and a classical FEM on the same pipeline. Example 3 (torus forward BVP) tests whether the atlas and Schwarz coupling survive a nonlinear geometry-informed neural charts 17 

equilibrium solve with history-dependent 𝐽 2 elastoplasticity. Example 4 (torus inverse Neo-Hookean) reverses the information flow, using observed boundary data to recover constitutive parameters across multiple charts. Example 5 (elastoplastic inverse) extends the identification to cyclic loading with plasticity, recovering yield stress and kinematic hardening from reaction-force data. Each example therefore adds one layer of complexity—geometry, nonlinearity, inverse capability, or history dependence—so that a failure at any stage isolates the source of the difficulty. 5.1 Example 1: Verifcation with Laplac’s equation on the ellipsoid We use the Laplace’s equation with known analytical solution to verify our implementation. The corresponding boundary value problem reads, 

−Δ𝑥 𝑢 = 𝑓 in Ω, 𝑢 = 𝑔 on 𝜕 Ω. (44) For a chart-local scalar field, the mapped residual is 

bR(1) 

> 𝑖

(𝜻 ) := −∇ 𝜻 ·  A𝑖 (𝜻 )∇ 𝜻 b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ) − 𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 ) 𝑓 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) , A𝑖 (𝜻 ) := 𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 )J𝑖 (𝜻 )−1J𝑖 (𝜻 )−𝑇 . (45) The boundary loss is 

bB(1) 

> 𝑖,𝐷

(𝜻 ) := b𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ) − 𝑔 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) . (46) The verification setup uses a single analytic map 

𝜑 (𝜉 1, 𝜉 2, 𝜉 3) = (𝑎𝜉 1, 𝑏𝜉 2, 𝑐𝜉 3), 𝝃 ∈ 𝐵 3, (𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 ) = (2.0, 1.4, 0.9),

which pulls the ellipsoid Ω = {x ∈ R3 : 𝑥 21/𝑎 2 + 𝑥 22/𝑏 2 + 𝑥 23/𝑐 2 < 1} back to the unit ball. The Jacobian is constant, 

J = diag (𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 ), with determinant 𝑗 = 𝑎𝑏𝑐 . Homogeneous Dirichlet data 𝑔 = 0 are prescribed on 𝜕 Ω. The exact solution in physical coordinates is 

𝑢 ∗ 

> ell

(x) = 1 − 𝑥 21

𝑎 2 − 𝑥 22

𝑏 2 − 𝑥 23

𝑐 2 , (47) and its pull-back to the reference ball is 

b𝑢 ∗ 

> ell

(𝝃 ) = 1 − ∥ 𝝃 ∥22. (48) Substituting (47) into (44) gives the constant source term 

𝑓 = 2

 1

𝑎 2 + 1

𝑏 2 + 1

𝑐 2



≈ 4.039 . (49) Because the geometry, the exact solution, and the forcing are all analytic, this example isolates the operator pullback from any geometry-learning uncertainty or overlap coupling. The canonical run reaches relative 𝐿 2 error 2 .26 ×

10 −3, absolute 𝐿 2 error 1 .08 × 10 −3, and maximum pointwise error 5 .23 × 10 −3 in 106 .3 s, confirming that the mapped operators and neural approximation are implemented correctly before atlas coupling and learned geometry are introduced, as shown in Figure 5. 5.2 Example 2: rabbit Poisson on a fixed atlas The rabbit Poisson benchmark investigates whether the atlas pipeline can support a complex-geometry forward solve without being tied to a single local solver family. Two atlases built by the same four-stage pipeline (Section 4)—a twelve-chart atlas for the PINN and an eight-chart atlas for the FEM—support two realizations of the mapped Poisson problem: chart-local PINN surrogates and chart-local P1 FEM solves. Both atlases satisfy the same quality gates; the chart count is a user parameter that trades per-chart complexity against the number of Schwarz interfaces, analogous to choosing a mesh resolution. The physical PDE is again (44), with the manufactured solution given by 

𝑢 ∗ 

> rabbit

(𝑥 ) = sin (𝜋𝑥 1) sin (𝜋𝑥 2) sin (𝜋𝑥 3), 𝑓 = 3𝜋 2𝑢 ∗

> rabbit

, (50) Dirichlet boundary condition is applied on the surface by substituting the position vectors into 50, while the interier 𝑢 

is obtained from the solver. 18 WaiChing Sun a

Fig. 5: Ellipsoidal verification benchmark rendered in 3D. The ellipsoid is clipped along a symmetry plane to expose the interior solution field. Panel (a) shows the predicted field 𝑢 ℎ, which peaks at the center and vanishes on the boundary as expected for the quadratic exact solution 𝑢 ∗ = 1 − ∥ 𝝃 ∥2. Panel (b) shows the absolute error |𝑢 ℎ − 𝑢 ∗ |,confirming that the operator pullback and the analytic geometric map are implemented correctly (relative 𝐿 2 error 

= 2.26 × 10 −3, maximum error = 5.23 × 10 −3). 

5.2.1 Schwarz PINN 

The interior and boundary residuals are the same as in Example 1, but the loss adds overlap coupling: 

L(2) =𝜆 pde 

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

EbΩ𝑖 

bR(1)

> 𝑖
> 2



+ 𝜆 bc 

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

EbΓ𝑖,𝐷 

bB(1)

> 𝑖,𝐷
> 2



+ 𝜆 if ,val ∑︁ 𝑖< 𝑗 

EbΩ𝑖 𝑗 

hb𝑢 𝑖 (𝜻 ) − b𝑢 𝑗 (𝜓 𝑖 𝑗 (𝜻 )) 2i

+ 𝜆 if ,flux ∑︁ 𝑖< 𝑗 

EbΩ𝑖 𝑗 

h

n𝑖 𝑗 · ∇ 𝑥 𝑢 𝑖 − n𝑖 𝑗 · ∇ 𝑥 𝑢 𝑗 2i

+ 𝜆 sup Lsup . (51) Here Lsup denotes an optional manufactured-solution anchor used in the rabbit PINN runs to stabilize Schwarz iteration. Each chart-local neural field can be represented by a dense MLP, a residual MLP, or a compact chart-partitioned network. The flagship run uses the compact architecture. This numerical example is designed to examine whether the geometry handling, chart-local approximation, and Schwarz transmission are functioning simultaneously in different solver settings. In principle, one may also construct a single global mapping to solve the Poisson problem on the Bunny geometry. In practice, however, obtaining such a mapping with sufficiently low distortion is difficult because of thin features (e.g., the ears). Resolving these details would also require a larger neural network to achieve sufficient expressivity and resolution, further increasing computational cost. By contrast, the atlas approach uses a divide-and-conquer strategy, reducing per-chart expressivity demands by partitioning the geometry into coordinate charts. Once the atlas is frozen, the PINN solver generates interior collocation by SDF rejection in chart coordinates, trains one scalar field network per chart, and enforces compatibility by interface-value and interface-flux penalties inside multiplicative Schwarz sweeps with a trust-region acceptance filter. 

5.2.2 Schwarz FEM 

In the atlas-based FEM, each chart solves the same mapped Poisson operator in weak form, 

∫

> bΩ𝑖

(∇ 𝜻 𝑣 )𝑇 A𝑖 (𝜻 ) ∇ 𝜻 b𝑢 𝑖 𝑑 𝜻 =

∫

> bΩ𝑖

𝑗 𝑖 (𝜻 ) 𝑓 (𝜑 𝑖 (𝜻 )) 𝑣 𝑑 𝜻 ,geometry-informed neural charts 19 

with Dirichlet data supplied by the physical boundary and by Schwarz traces on artificial chart boundaries. Each chart uses a P1 tetrahedral discretization of the structured cube [− 𝑟 𝑖 , 𝑟 𝑖 ]3 split by Freudenthal tetrahedra. The implementation reuses the same decoder–mask atlas machinery, overlap coloring, and partition-of-unity blending as the PINN solver; Schwarz boundary values are again obtained from neighboring chart solutions through the atlas, and the FEM runs disable SDF filtering by default for these volumetric chart meshes. 

5.2.3 Numerical results 

The compact PINN run attains relative 𝐿 2 error 2 .21 × 10 −2, absolute 𝐿 2 error 8 .57 × 10 −3, maximum pointwise error 6 .78 × 10 −2, final interface-flux mismatch 1 .16 × 10 −2, and runtime 3659 s. The training history records 61 Schwarz iterations, and the selected checkpoint stores twelve compact chart networks with roughly 1 .31 × 10 5

trainable chart-local weights in total. The solver terminates after a fixed sweep budget ( 𝐾 = 100); within that budget, the trust-region filter (Appendix F) rejects any sweep whose blended relative-𝐿 2 error exceeds that of the previous accepted state by more than a prescribed tolerance, rolling back to the snapshot and reducing the local learning rate. The best checkpoint is selected a posteriori as the sweep with the lowest blended relative-𝐿 2 error. The diagnostics in Figures 6 and 8 show the same behavior spatially and temporally: the field remains smooth on the rabbit surface and the objective components contract over Schwarz iterations. A shorter dense-MLP run reaches best-checkpoint relative 

𝐿 2 error 2 .53 × 10 −2 and maximum pointwise error 5 .30 × 10 −2 in 404 s, with a tighter final interface-flux mismatch of 2 .52 × 10 −3. The compact architecture therefore improves the best global relative 𝐿 2 metric and convergence smoothness. Given the high dimensionality of the Schwarz-PINN hyperparameter space, we used a coding assistant (Claude Sonnet 4.6) to explore tuning options for 24 hours. The results are summarized in Table 12 in Appendix G. They show that the combination of direct-coordinate evaluation, manufactured-solution anchoring, plateau detection, stronger overlap coupling, and PCGrad may all improve the dense-MLP relative 𝐿 2 from 3 .70% to 2 .53%; CompactChartNet then reaches 2 .21%. Nevertheless, it should be noted that, in a realistic setting, the solution is often not known a priori and hence the results obtained with a manufactured-solution anchor are not representative. We believe further hyperparameter tuning may reduce the PINN errors; see, for instance, [37, 38]. However, such an endeavor is outside the scope of this study. Table 5 reports the FEM ℎ-refinement study from 𝑛 cells = 8 to 56. The relative 𝐿 2 error drops from 5 .47 × 10 −1 to 1.79 × 10 −2, with rates consistent with the theoretical 𝑂 (ℎ2) behavior of mapped P1 elements (reaching 2 .10 at the finest level). The FEM curve (Figure 9) approaches the compact PINN reference at 𝑛 cells = 48 and crosses below it at 

𝑛 cells = 56. Table 5: Atlas-based FEM ℎ-refinement study for the rabbit Poisson benchmark. Rates are computed between successive refinement levels using the relative-𝐿 2 error.                                                                

> 𝑛 cells ℎDOFs rel. 𝐿 2Rate Max error Time 89.31 ×
> 10 −25,832 5.47 ×10 −1—2.42 ×10 −17 s 16 4.65 ×
> 10 −239,304 2.00 ×10 −11.45 9.04 ×10 −245 s 24 3.10 ×
> 10 −2125,000 9.49 ×10 −21.84 4.47 ×10 −25 min 32 2.33 ×
> 10 −2287,496 5.55 ×10 −21.86 2.64 ×10 −221 min 48 1.55 ×
> 10 −2941,192 2.48 ×10 −21.99 1.12 ×10 −249 min 56 1.33 ×
> 10 −21,481,544 1.79 ×10 −22.10 8.72 ×10 −3140 min

Table 6 clarifies the tradeoff along several axes. The PINN and FEM use atlases with different chart counts (12 and 8, respectively), reflecting the different granularity preferences of the two solver families: finer charts simplify per-chart neural approximation, while coarser charts maximize per-chart DOF counts for efficient Newton solves. Both atlases are produced by the same four-stage pipeline and satisfy the same quality gates; the chart count is a user parameter analogous to mesh resolution. 20 WaiChing Sun a

Table 6: Workflow-level rabbit comparison. The compact PINN uses a frozen 12-chart atlas; the FEM uses a frozen 8-chart atlas built by the same pipeline with a different chart-count parameter. Both atlases pass the same quality gates. The PINN row reports the selected best-rel-𝐿 2 checkpoint; the FEM rows report final metrics after five Schwarz sweeps.                                              

> Local solver Charts Size rel. 𝐿 2Max error Sweeps Runtime PINN compact 12 1.31 ×10 5weights 2.21 ×
> 10 −26.78 ×
> 10 −261 3659 s FEM P1 (𝑛 =48 )89.41 ×10 5DOFs 2.48 ×
> 10 −21.12 ×
> 10 −252939 s FEM P1 (𝑛 =56 )81.48 ×10 6DOFs 1.79 ×10 −28.72 ×10 −358395 s

At 𝑛 cells = 48, the atlas-FEM error 2 .48 × 10 −2 is already comparable to the compact PINN’s 2 .21 × 10 −2, and at 𝑛 cells = 56 it improves that metric by about 19%. In wall-clock time the two methods are broadly competitive at matched accuracy: the FEM reaches 2 .48 × 10 −2 in 2 ,939 s versus the PINN’s 2 .21 × 10 −2 in 3 ,659 s. Surpassing the PINN with the FEM requires the 𝑛 = 56 level at 8 ,395 s, indicating that the atlas-plus-Schwarz infrastructure is the dominant cost driver in both cases, not the local PDE discretization itself. The Schwarz behavior is qualitatively different. The FEM branch converges in five sweeps because each chart solves a sparse linear system by direct factorization, while inter-chart Schwarz boundary data require Newton inversion of the nonlinear decoder map 𝜑 −1 

> 𝑗

. These inversions are precomputed once per resolution level and cached, since they depend only on the atlas geometry and not on the evolving solution. The PINN branch instead evaluates its field directly in the rigid local coordinates, avoiding decoder inversion entirely, but at the expense of a longer gradient-based Schwarz history (61 sweeps) and ∼200 local optimizer steps per chart per sweep. A revealing comparison metric is the total number of neural-network forward passes through the shared decoder and mask networks. The FEM solver queries these networks only during the one-time geometric precomputation— Newton-based map inversions at artificial boundary nodes and mask-logit evaluations for partition-of-unity weights— amounting to approximately 23 million forward passes at 𝑛 = 48, performed once and cached. The SA-PINN evaluates its chart-local field networks and their autograd derivatives at every training step across all Schwarz sweeps: with 61 sweeps, ∼200 local steps per chart, 12 active charts, and ∼2,000 collocation points per step, the total reaches approximately 195 million neural-network evaluations, roughly 8 .5× the FEM count. This disparity quantifies the fundamental cost difference: the PINN pays for approximation power through iterative training, while the FEM amortizes geometry queries into a one-time precomputation and pays instead through mesh refinement. The FEM convergence study in Table 5 serves as an independent validation of the atlas-based coordinate pullback. The observed 𝑂 (ℎ2) rates—approaching the theoretical expectation for P1 elements—confirm that the mapped diffusion tensor A𝑖 = 𝑗 𝑖 J−1 

> 𝑖

J−𝑇 𝑖 , the Jacobian-weighted load vector, and the Schwarz boundary exchange introduce no spurious accuracy degradation. This is a statement about the geometric infrastructure, not about either solver: the atlas is mathematically faithful as a coordinate substrate. The rabbit benchmark therefore supports a sharper conclusion: the atlas is independent of the local discretization, and the FEM convergence independently certifies the correctness of the mapped-operator formulation. Figure 7 repeats the same surface-rendering protocol for the finest atlas-FEM baseline ( 𝑛 cells = 56). Using the same rabbit shell and the same camera angle as Figure 6 makes the comparison direct: the recovered scalar field is visually consistent with the compact PINN at the scale of the rendered surface, while the FEM absolute-error map is markedly smaller and more uniform. This qualitative contrast matches Table 6: the FEM improves the relative 𝐿 2

error from 2 .21 × 10 −2 to 1 .79 × 10 −2 and reduces the maximum pointwise error from 6 .78 × 10 −2 to 8 .72 × 10 −3. The entropy panel is retained only to preserve the same atlas-view convention as the PINN rendering, so that the reader can compare the two surface solutions under identical visual framing. 5.3 Example 3: forward elastoplastic boundary-value problem on the torus This example solves a forward boundary-value problem for finite-strain 𝐽 2 elastoplasticity with kinematic hardening on the full torus, using the eight-chart atlas and multiplicative Schwarz coupling. Unlike the inverse benchmarks that follow, the displacement field is unknown and must be determined from equilibrium: at each load step the Newton– geometry-informed neural charts 21 

Fig. 6: Representative rabbit-surface visualization for the fixed-atlas SA-PINN solver. The surface is reconstructed from a dense boundary postprocessing pass of the rabbit Poisson solution family and shown from one fixed camera in all three panels. Panel (a) shows the recovered scalar field, panel (b) shows the absolute error, and panel (c) shows the chart entropy induced by the partition-of-unity weights. The first two panels show that the solved field remains smooth on the complex geometry, while the entropy panel shows that uncertainty is confined to narrow overlap traces rather than spreading over the whole surface. 

Fig. 7: Rabbit atlas-FEM surface rendering at the finest refinement level ( 𝑛 cells = 56). The figure uses the same reconstructed rabbit surface and the same fixed camera as Figure 6. Panel (a) shows the FEM scalar field, panel (b) shows the absolute error, and panel (c) shows chart entropy reconstructed from the frozen rabbit atlas masks on the shared surface postprocessor. The first two panels show that the atlas-FEM branch recovers the same large-scale field as the compact PINN while producing a visibly smaller surface error. 22 WaiChing Sun a

Fig. 8: Training diagnostics for the canonical rabbit Poisson compact PINN run. Each panel reports one scalar trace over Schwarz iterations: total objective, PDE residual, boundary loss, interface-value loss, interface-flux loss, and evaluation relative 𝐿 2 error. 

Fig. 9: Atlas-based FEM convergence on the rabbit benchmark. The dashed line gives an 𝑂 (ℎ2) reference slope; the dotted horizontal line marks the compact PINN accuracy 2 .21 × 10 −2. The FEM trajectory crosses the PINN level near 𝑛 cells = 48. geometry-informed neural charts 23 

Raphson iteration solves R(u) = fint (u) − fext = 0 on every chart, with Schwarz interface conditions transmitting displacement continuity across chart boundaries. This is the first example in the manuscript where nonlinear material response, incremental history dependence, mapped PDE operators, and multi-chart Schwarz coupling are all active simultaneously. 

5.3.1 Problem definition 

The torus geometry ( 𝑅 = 1.0, 𝑟 = 0.35) is covered by eight azimuthal charts with Δ𝜙 = 𝜋 /4 half-width, as in the Neo-Hookean identification benchmark. The material is governed by the compressible 𝐽 2 elastoplastic model with kinematic hardening detailed in Appendix E: elastic moduli 𝐸 = 200, 𝜈 = 0.3 ( 𝜇 = 76 .92, 𝐾 = 166 .67), yield stress 

𝜏 𝑦 = 0.5, and kinematic hardening modulus 𝐻 kin = 20, with the smooth softplus return mapping (76) at 𝜀 𝑠 = 0.01. Cyclic opposite displacements are prescribed on two cross-sections of the torus to squeeze the central hole: 

𝑢 𝑥 𝜙 ≈0 = +𝛿 (𝑡 ), 𝑢 𝑥 𝜙 ≈ 𝜋 = −𝛿 (𝑡 ), (52) where 𝛿 (𝑡 ) follows a triangular cyclic profile: 0 → + 𝛿 max → − 𝛿 max → 0 with 𝛿 max = 0.02 𝑟 . All other torus-surface nodes are traction-free, and Schwarz interface displacement continuity is enforced on chart boundaries. Each chart uses a P1 tetrahedral mesh on a structured hexahedral grid with Freudenthal decomposition, and Newton–Raphson equilibrium is solved with an autograd-computed consistent tangent through the smooth return mapping. At each load step, 8 multiplicative Schwarz sweeps are performed. Within each sweep, charts are visited by color groups from the overlap adjacency graph: non-overlapping charts may be updated concurrently, while overlapping neighbours exchange frozen displacement traces at their shared interface nodes. The per-chart Newton solver typically converges in 1–4 iterations with residual tolerance 10 −7.

5.3.2 Mesh refinement study 

Three mesh resolutions are tested with an identical cyclic loading protocol (30 steps per half-cycle, 120 total steps, 1 cycle): Table 7: Mesh refinement study for the 8-chart Schwarz forward elastoplastic BVP. All runs use the same cyclic loading protocol ( 𝛿 max = 0.02 𝑟 , 120 steps).                                          

> 𝑛 cells Nodes Elements DOF Final ¯𝜀 𝑝 Interface jump Time (s) s/step 41,000 3,072 3,000 3.18 ×10 −22.21 ×10 −7189 1.6 62,744 10,368 8,232 5.41 ×10 −24.83 ×10 −8502 4.2 85,832 24,576 17,496 7.83 ×10 −21.97 ×10 −71,394 11.6

Table 7 shows that the solver converges at all three resolutions with Newton requiring only 1–4 iterations per chart per sweep. The accumulated plastic strain ¯ 𝜀 𝑝 increases with mesh refinement because finer meshes resolve sharper strain gradients near the loaded cross-sections where plastic flow concentrates. The Schwarz interface displacement jump remains 𝑂 (10 −7) or better throughout, confirming tight inter-chart coupling under nonlinear, history-dependent loading. 

5.3.3 Load-step sensitivity 

To verify temporal convergence, the 𝑛 cells = 6 mesh is run with steps per half-cycle ∈ { 10 , 20 , 40 } (Table 8). The final accumulated plastic strain varies by only 0 .16% across the tested range, confirming that the smooth return mapping and incremental load-stepping produce temporally converged results. The interface jump halves with each step-size refinement, consistent with first-order splitting in the multiplicative Schwarz scheme. Figure 11 shows the displacement field on a finer mesh ( 𝑛 cells = 10, 1,331 nodes per chart, 6,000 elements per chart) at load step 100, which falls in the recovery phase of the cycle ( 𝛿 ≈ − 23 𝛿 max ). By this point the torus has completed the full loading–unloading–reverse-loading sequence and is partially recovering toward the undeformed configuration, so the displacement field reflects the combined effects of elastic recovery and accumulated plastic deformation with 24 WaiChing Sun a0 20 40 60 80 100 120 

> Load step
> 0.00
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.03
> 0.04
> 0.05
> 0.06
> 0.07
> 0.08
> max  p

(a) Accumulated plastic strain               

> ncells = 4
> ncells = 6
> ncells = 8
> 020 40 60 80 100 120
> Load step
> 10 7
> 4 × 10 8
> 6 × 10 8
> 2 × 10 7
> 3 × 10 7
> Interface displacement jump

(b) Schwarz interface continuity      

> ncells = 4
> ncells = 6
> ncells = 8
> 10 20 40
> Steps per half-cycle
> 0.05408
> 0.05410
> 0.05412
> 0.05414
> Final max  p
> spread: 0.16%

(c) Load-step convergence      

> 10 43 × 10 34 × 10 36 × 10 3
> Total DOF (8 charts)
> 10 1
> 2 × 10 0
> 3 × 10 0
> 4 × 10 0
> 6 × 10 0
> Wall time per step (s)
> n= 4
> n= 6
> n= 8

(d) Computational cost scaling 

Fig. 10: Diagnostics for the 8-chart Schwarz forward elastoplastic BVP. (a) Accumulated plastic strain ¯ 𝜀 𝑝 vs. load step for three mesh resolutions; finer meshes resolve larger peak strains near the loaded sections. (b) Schwarz interface displacement jump remains 𝑂 (10 −7) throughout. (c) Load-step convergence: the final plastic strain varies by 0 .16% across a 4 × range of step sizes. (d) Computational cost scaling with total DOF. (a) (b) (c) 

Fig. 11: Displacement field components on the torus at step 100 of the cyclic loading protocol ( 𝑛 cells = 10, 𝛿 ≈ − 23 𝛿 max ,recovery phase). (a) 𝑢 𝑥 , (b) 𝑢 𝑦 , (c) 𝑢 𝑧 . The opposite 𝑥 -displacement boundary conditions at 𝜙 ≈ 0 and 𝜙 ≈ 𝜋 produce the dominant 𝑢 𝑥 pattern, while 𝑢 𝑦 and 𝑢 𝑧 arise from the curved torus geometry coupling in-plane compression to out-of-plane deformation. All fields are the direct P1 finite-element nodal solution with no postprocessing interpolation. geometry-informed neural charts 25 

Table 8: Load-step sensitivity for the forward BVP at 𝑛 cells = 6. The final accumulated plastic strain varies by 0 .16% across a 4 × range of step sizes.                              

> Steps/half Total steps Final ¯𝜀 𝑝 Interface jump Time (s) 10 40 5.407 ×10 −21.40 ×10 −7171 20 80 5.413 ×10 −27.20 ×10 −8330 40 160 5.416 ×10 −23.62 ×10 −8657

kinematic hardening. The finer mesh is used here for visualization quality; the quantitative convergence metrics are reported at 𝑛 cells ≤ 8 in Tables 7–8. The forward BVP benchmark shows that the atlas-based Schwarz infrastructure extends from scalar diffusion (Example 2) and hyperelastic identification (Example 4) to nonlinear equilibrium with history-dependent plasticity. The Newton–Raphson solver converges robustly across all mesh sizes and loading steps, the interface displacement jump remains 𝑂 (10 −7), and the temporal convergence study confirms that the smooth return mapping produces consistent plastic strain accumulation independent of step size. 5.4 Example 4: torus inverse Neo-Hookean identification This example demonstrates constitutive parameter identification on a three-dimensional torus ( 𝑅 = 1.0, 𝑟 = 0.35) under prescribed torsional kinematics. Unlike the rabbit and ellipsoid, the torus is not simply connected : its fundamental group 𝜋 1 (T2)  Z × Z prevents any single homeomorphism from a reference ball 𝐵 3 onto the toroidal solid. A multi-chart atlas is therefore topologically necessary, not merely algorithmically convenient. The domain is covered by eight azimuthal charts with 20% overlap, each mapping a reference cube to a sector of the torus. The unknowns are the global shear modulus 𝜇 and bulk modulus 𝐾 of a compressible Neo-Hookean material. Three solver configurations are compared: (a) a single-optimizer global solve, (b) multiplicative Schwarz with per-chart parameters and traction observations, and (c) multiplicative Schwarz with per-chart parameters and displacement observations. 

5.4.1 Problem formulation 

Let 

upres  

> 𝜏

: Ωtorus → R3 (53) be the prescribed torsional displacement field. In physical coordinates 𝑥 = (𝑥 1, 𝑥 2, 𝑥 3), the displacement takes the form 

upres  

> 𝜏

(𝑥 ) = 𝜏 𝑤 (𝜙 ) ( 1 + 𝛼 𝑥 3/𝑟 ) (− 𝑥 2, 𝑥 1, 0)𝑇 , (54) where 𝜙 = arctan (𝑥 2/𝑥 1) is the azimuthal angle, 𝜏 = 0.085 is the torsion amplitude, 𝛼 = 0.75 is a through-thickness scaling factor, and 𝑤 (𝜙 ) = 12 [1 + cos (𝜋 (𝜙 − 𝜙 𝑐 )/ 𝜙 𝑤 )] is a smooth cosine window centred at 𝜙 𝑐 = 𝜋 /2 with half-width 

𝜙 𝑤 = 0.35 𝜋 (≈63 ◦). The window localizes the torsion to one part of the torus; outside the window the displacement vanishes. The constitutive law is the compressible Neo-Hookean first Piola–Kirchhoff stress 

P(F; 𝜇, 𝐾 ) = 𝜇 



F − F−𝑇 

+ 𝐾 ln (det F) F−𝑇 . (55) Synthetic boundary observations are generated on a loaded surface subset Γobs spanning a ∼126 ◦ azimuthal arc, with 

𝑁 obs = 6,000 observation points. For traction-mode experiments the observed quantity is 

tobs (𝑥 ) = P Fpres  

> 𝜏

(𝑥 ); 𝜇 true , 𝐾 true 

 n(𝑥 ), 𝑥 ∈ Γobs , (56) with (𝜇 true , 𝐾 true ) = (1.8, 25 .0). Because the deformation gradient is prescribed rather than learned, the benchmark isolates the constitutive identification from the forward equilibrium solve. 26 WaiChing Sun a

5.4.2 Solver configuration (a): global atlas optimizer 

In the global configuration, a single pair (𝜇, 𝐾 ) is optimized by minimizing the chart-weighted traction mismatch 

L(4) 

> trac

(𝜇, 𝐾 ) = 1

𝑀 

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

Í𝑁 obs  

> 𝑘 =1

𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑘 ) t(𝑥 𝑘 ; 𝜇, 𝐾 ) − tobs (𝑥 𝑘 ) 22

Í𝑁 obs  

> 𝑘 =1

𝜔 𝑖 (𝑥 𝑘 ) + 𝜀 , (57) where 𝜔 𝑖 are fixed azimuthal partition-of-unity weights from the eight-chart atlas. A determinant barrier 𝐶 det =

E[softplus (𝛿 − det Fpres  

> 𝜏

)2] is included for kinematic admissibility monitoring but is constant with respect to (𝜇, 𝐾 )

since the kinematics are prescribed: 

L(4) 

> tot

(𝜇, 𝐾 ) = L(4) 

> trac

(𝜇, 𝐾 ) + 𝜆 det 𝐶 det . (58) Starting from (𝜇 0, 𝐾 0) = (1.746 , 26 .0), the canonical run converges to (𝜇, 𝐾 ) = (1.800000 , 25 .000006 ) after 300 epochs (201 s), with final relative errors of 9 .27 × 10 −6% for 𝜇 and 2 .29 × 10 −5% for 𝐾 , and a traction relative 

𝐿 2 error of 2 .35 × 10 −7. The per-chart evaluation MSE values are uniformly below 1 .3 × 10 −13 , confirming that the chart-weighted aggregation introduces no observable inconsistency. 

5.4.3 Solver configurations (b)–(c): multiplicative Schwarz with per-chart parameters 

The Schwarz variant replaces the single (𝜇, 𝐾 ) pair with per-chart unknowns {( 𝜇 𝑖 , 𝐾 𝑖 )} 8

> 𝑖 =1

, updated through red– black alternating sweeps (even charts, then odd charts). Each chart 𝑖 minimizes a local loss comprising three terms: (i) a chart-weighted data-mismatch term against observations within chart 𝑖 ’s support, (ii) an interface consensus penalty 

Lif ,𝑖 =

 𝜇 𝑖 − ¯𝜇 nb (𝑖 )

𝜇 true 

2

+

 𝐾 𝑖 − ¯𝐾 nb (𝑖 )

𝐾 true 

2

, (59) where ¯ 𝜇 nb (𝑖 ) and ¯ 𝐾 nb (𝑖 ) are the frozen neighbor-chart parameter averages from the previous Schwarz sweep, and (iii) a weak regularization toward prior estimates. Two inverse data modes are tested: 

– Traction mode (b) : observations are the synthetic traction vectors from (56). After 300 epochs (76.9 s), the chart-averaged parameters converge to ¯ 𝜇 = 1.7938 ± 9.93 × 10 −4 and ¯ 𝐾 = 25 .14 ± 2.80 × 10 −2, with mean relative errors of 0 .35% for 𝜇 and 0 .54% for 𝐾 . The blended traction relative 𝐿 2 error is 5 .80 × 10 −3.

– Displacement mode (c) : observations are surrogate displacement values derived from the prescribed kinematics. After 405 epochs (38.6 s), the chart-averaged parameters converge to ¯𝜇 = 1.8000 ± 1.47 × 10 −13 and ¯𝐾 =

25 .25 ± 1.53 × 10 −2, with 𝜇 recovered to machine precision across all eight charts ( 𝜇 relative error < 10 −11 %) and 𝐾 relative error of 1 .0%. The displacement relative 𝐿 2 error is 1 .74 × 10 −3.Table 9: Torus inverse identification: comparison of three solver configurations on the same eight-chart atlas. All runs use the same prescribed torsional kinematics and true parameters (𝜇 true , 𝐾 true ) = (1.8, 25 .0). The Schwarz variants report mean ± standard deviation across eight per-chart parameter estimates.                                               

> Configuration 𝜇 error (%) 𝐾 error (%) Obs. rel-𝐿 2Chart 𝜇 std Time (s) (a) Global optimizer 9.27 ×10 −62.29 ×10 −52.35 ×10 −7—201 (b) Schwarz traction 3.45 ×10 −15.41 ×10 −15.80 ×10 −39.93 ×10 −476.9 (c) Schwarz displacement 4.08 ×10 −12 1.00 ×10 01.74 ×10 −31.47 ×10 −13 38.6

Table 9 reveals two complementary findings. First, the global optimizer (a) reaches near-exact parameter recovery because all 6 ,000 observation points contribute to a single well-conditioned traction-matching objective. Second, the Schwarz configurations (b) and (c) demonstrate that the eight-chart atlas can support distributed parameter identification, with each chart maintaining its own material constants and achieving inter-chart consensus through the interface penalty (59). In displacement mode (c), the chart-to-chart standard deviation of 𝜇 is 1 .47 ×10 −13 —effectively machine precision—confirming that the Schwarz coupling drives all eight charts to identical parameter values despite geometry-informed neural charts 27 

Fig. 12: Torus inverse benchmark (global optimizer), rendered from VTU exports on the three-dimensional surface. (a) Prescribed deformed configuration colored by displacement magnitude |u|; the torsional load is localized over a 

∼126 ◦ azimuthal arc. (b) Traction-error magnitude |t − tobs |; the mismatch is concentrated in the loaded region and remains below 1 .2 × 10 −3 everywhere. (c) Eight-chart atlas decomposition of the torus, with each color denoting a distinct azimuthal chart; the multi-chart atlas is topologically necessary because the solid torus is not simply connected. 

Fig. 13: Parameter convergence history for the global torus optimizer. (a) Relative errors of 𝜇 and 𝐾 decrease monotonically over 100 epochs, reaching ∼10 −2% for both parameters. (b) Traction mismatch Ltrac decreases by five orders of magnitude from initialization to the 10 −8 level. The oscillatory pattern in (a) reflects the alternating descent directions in the two-parameter landscape. 28 WaiChing Sun a

Fig. 14: Schwarz-based distributed parameter identification on the torus, rendered from VTU exports. Top row: traction-mode Schwarz. Bottom row: displacement-mode Schwarz. (a, c) Observation-error magnitude on the torus surface; the traction-mode error is roughly 10 × larger than the displacement-mode error. (b, d) Per-chart shear-modulus estimate ˆ 𝜇 𝑖 

mapped onto the torus surface; the color range is [1.79 , 1.81 ] centered on 𝜇 true = 1.8. In displacement mode (d), the surface is nearly uniform, consistent with the machine-precision inter-chart consensus ( 𝜇 std = 1.47 × 10 −13 ) reported in Table 9. independent optimization. The higher 𝐾 error in mode (c) reflects a well-known challenge in displacement-based inverse identification: the surrogate displacement field has weaker sensitivity to volumetric stiffness than traction data, making bulk modulus recovery inherently harder from kinematic observations alone. The torus benchmark establishes three points relevant to the paper’s thesis. First, the atlas-based constitutive operator is not limited to Poisson diffusion: the Neo-Hookean stress evaluation and its derivatives are correctly mediated through the chart decomposition (Figures 12a–b). Second, the multiplicative Schwarz framework extends naturally from field coupling (Example 2) to parameter-level consensus enforcement across charts, as evidenced by the near-uniform ˆ 𝜇 𝑖 field in Figure 14d. In displacement mode, the chart-averaged 𝜇 converges to the true value within 

∼50 epochs and the inter-chart standard deviation collapses to machine precision; in traction mode, 𝜇 oscillates more strongly before settling near 1 .794, reflecting the richer but noisier gradient signal from traction observations. Both modes drive 𝐾 monotonically downward from 26 .0 toward the true value 25 .0, though traction data reaches closer (25 .14 vs. 25 .25) within the allotted epochs. Third, the per-chart standard deviation provides a built-in consistency diagnostic: large inter-chart parameter disagreement would signal atlas or observation pathologies before any external validation is needed. geometry-informed neural charts 29 

5.5 Example 5: torus elastoplastic parameter identification This example extends the torus inverse benchmark from elastic to history-dependent elastoplastic constitutive parameter estimation. While Example 4 recovers constant elastic moduli (𝜇, 𝐾 ) from a single prescribed deformation, Example 5 introduces a two-stage problem in which the yield stress 𝜏 𝑦 and kinematic hardening modulus 𝐻 kin 

are recovered from incremental loading histories that include cyclic plastic deformation. The key methodological contribution is a smooth return mapping that replaces the non-differentiable yield-surface check with a softplus regularisation, enabling end-to-end gradient-based optimization through the full elastoplastic load-stepping solver. The forward solver uses the same chart-local P1 finite-element infrastructure validated in Example 3 (Section 5.3), operating in a single reference chart of the torus atlas; this demonstrates that the Piola-mapped operator framework extends naturally from forward equilibrium to gradient-based inverse identification. 

5.5.1 Constitutive model and solver setup 

The material is governed by finite-strain 𝐽 2 elastoplasticity with kinematic hardening in the multiplicative frame-work of Simo and Hughes [2]. The constitutive equations—multiplicative decomposition F = F𝑒 F𝑝 (73), logarithmic-strain Kirchhoff stress (74), von Mises yield function with back-stress (75), and the smooth softplus return mapping (76)—are detailed in Appendix E. The smooth return mapping replaces the non-differentiable yield-surface check with a 𝐶 ∞ softplus regularization, enabling end-to-end gradient-based optimization through the full elastoplastic load-stepping solver. At sharpness 𝜀 𝑠 = 0.001 𝜏 𝑦 the smooth response is visually indistinguishable from the classical radial return (Figure 15a). A comparison with central finite differences confirms that the autograd gradient through the smooth return mapping is correct (both methods recover 𝜏 𝑦 to within 0 .25%) while providing a 2 .9× wall-clock speedup. With the classical hard-max return mapping, autograd gradients are zero in the plastic regime and the optimizer stalls. The forward solver is a chart-local P1 FEM (Algorithm 2) on a structured hexahedral grid with Freudenthal six-tet decomposition (4 3 = 64 hexahedra, 384 elements, 125 nodes), operating on a single torus chart sector ( 𝑅 = 1.0, 

𝑟 = 0.35, azimuthal half-width Δ𝜙 = 𝜋 /4). In chart-local reference coordinates 𝜻 ∈ [− 1, 1]3, the boundary conditions are: 

u 𝜁 1=−1 = 0 (clamped) , 𝑢 1 𝜁 1=+1 = 𝜀 app · 2𝑟 (prescribed extension) , (60) where 𝑟 is the chart support radius and 𝜀 app is the applied nominal strain, incremented over the loading history. All other boundary faces are traction-free. At each load step, Newton–Raphson iteration solves the chart-local residual (34) with an autograd-computed consistent tangent through the smooth return mapping (Remark 3). Gradients with respect to material parameters 𝜃 = (𝜏 𝑦 , 𝐻 kin ) are obtained via the implicit function theorem. 

5.5.2 Two-stage inverse identification Stage 1: yield stress. The elastic moduli are assumed known ( 𝜇 = 76 .92, 𝐾 = 166 .67, corresponding to 𝐸 = 200, 

𝜈 = 0.3) and kinematic hardening is inactive ( 𝐻 kin = 0). A monotonic uniaxial tension test is applied: 𝜀 app increases linearly from 0 to 0 .08 in 5 load steps. The unknown yield stress 𝜏 𝑦 is identified from the relative displacement mismatch at 𝑛 𝑠 = 20 interior sensor nodes: 

Ldisp =

> 𝑁 step

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

u(𝑡 ) 

> pred

− u(𝑡 )

> obs
> 2

u(𝑡 ) 

> obs
> 2

. (61) Starting from 𝜏 𝑦, 0 = 1.0 (100% above the true value 𝜏 𝑦, true = 0.5), 100 Adam iterations recover 𝜏 𝑦 = 0.4988, a 0.25% relative error . The optimizer converges from initial guesses spanning 𝜏 𝑦, 0 ∈ { 0.1, . . . , 2.0} (Figure 16a), indicating a wide basin of attraction. 30 WaiChing Sun a

Stage 2: kinematic hardening. With 𝜏 𝑦 fixed at its Stage 1 estimate, the unknown is 𝐻 kin . Two full symmetric load– unload–reverse cycles are applied: 𝜀 app ramps from 0 → + 𝜀 peak , reverses to −𝜀 peak , and returns to 0, with 𝜀 peak = 0.03 and 15 steps per half-cycle (120 total load steps). The observations are reaction forces at the loaded face 𝜉 1 = +1 rather than interior displacements, because the back-stress 𝜷 shifts the yield surface in stress space and interior displacements are insensitive to this shift under prescribed kinematics. The objective is 

LRF = 1

|S|∑︁ 𝑡 ∈S



𝑅 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑥, pred

− 𝑅 (𝑡 )

> 𝑥, obs

2

, (62) where 𝑅 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑥

= Í𝑎 ∈Γload 𝑓 (𝑎 ) 

> int ,𝑥

is the total 𝑥 -reaction force at load step 𝑡 . Starting from 𝐻 kin ,0 = 5.0 (75% below 

𝐻 kin ,true = 20 .0), 150 Adam iterations recover 𝐻 kin = 19 .58, a 2.11% relative error (Figure 16b). Table 10: Two-stage elastoplastic inverse identification results. Stage 1 identifies 𝜏 𝑦 from monotonic displacement data; Stage 2 identifies 𝐻 kin from cyclic reaction-force data. Material: 𝐸 = 200, 𝜈 = 0.3. Mesh: 4 3 hexahedra (384 P1 tetrahedra, 125 nodes).                   

> Stage Unknown Observation type Loading True Identified Error (%) 1𝜏 𝑦 interior displacements monotonic, 5 steps 0.500 0.4988 0.25 2𝐻 kin boundary reaction forces cyclic, 120 steps 20.0 19.58 2.11

5.5.3 Sensitivity analysis 

The robustness of the inverse procedure is assessed through three studies (Figure 18). Initial-guess sensitivity : 𝜏 𝑦 is recovered from initial guesses spanning an order of magnitude (0 .1–2 .0), all converging to within 0 .1% of the true value. 

Mesh refinement : the inverse is solved on meshes with 𝑛 cells ∈ { 3, 4, 6, 8} (64–729 nodes); the 𝜏 𝑦 error is consistent across all mesh sizes. Smoothing parameter sensitivity : annealing schedules with 𝜀 𝑠, start ∈ { 0.01 , 0.05 , 0.1, 0.5} all converge to the correct 𝜏 𝑦 ; only 𝜀 𝑠, start = 1.0 fails, producing a biased estimate because the overly smooth yield surface does not develop sufficient plastic deformation to generate a meaningful gradient signal. Additive Gaussian noise at levels up to 5% yields 𝜏 𝑦 errors below 5%. 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 

> Axial strain
> 0.14
> 0.16
> 0.18
> 0.20
> 0.22
> 0.24
> 0.26
> Kirchhoff stress  11

(a) Softplus regularisation ( effect)     

> = 0.1
> = 0.01
> = 0.001
> 0.10 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
> Axial strain
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> Deviatoric stress  dev( )

(b) Cyclic response (Bauschinger effect)     

> Hkin = 0 (perfect)
> Hkin = 10
> Hkin = 30

Fig. 15: Elastoplastic constitutive response. (a) Uniaxial stress–strain curves for three softplus sharpness values 𝜀 𝑠 ;at 𝜀 𝑠 = 0.001, the smooth response is indistinguishable from the sharp classical yield point ( 𝜏 𝑦 = 0.5). (b) Cyclic stress–strain loops for three kinematic hardening moduli: 𝐻 kin > 0 shifts the reverse yield point (Bauschinger effect), enabling 𝐻 kin identification from cyclic data. geometry-informed neural charts 31 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Iteration 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

> y estimate

(a) Stage 1: y recovery       

> y, 0 = 0.1
> y, 0 = 0.3
> y, 0 = 0.5
> y, 0 = 0.7
> y, 0 = 1.0
> y, 0 = 2.0
> y, true

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 

Iteration 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

> Hkin  estimate

(b) Stage 2: Hkin recovery 

Hkin, true = 20 

Fig. 16: Inverse parameter recovery convergence. (a) Stage 1: 𝜏 𝑦 trajectories from six initial guesses; all converge to 

𝜏 𝑦, true = 0.5 within 100 iterations. (b) Stage 2: 𝐻 kin recovery from 𝐻 kin ,0 = 5 using reaction-force observations; the estimate reaches 19 .58 (2 .11% error) after 150 iterations. 0.004 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.000 0.001 0.002 0.003  

> 11 (log strain)
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 11  (Kirchhoff stress)

Point A (near loaded face)  

> Atlas checkpoints
> 0.0008 0.0006 0.0004 0.0002 0.0000 0.0002 0.0004 0.0006 0.0008
> 11 (log strain)
> 0.20
> 0.15
> 0.10
> 0.05
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20

Point B (mid-domain)       

> Atlas checkpoints
> 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.000 0.001 0.002
> 11 (log strain)
> 0.6
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6

Point C (near fixed face) 

> Atlas checkpoints

Stress-strain extracted from saved torus atlas checkpoints 

Fig. 17: Recovered versus true cyclic stress–strain response at three sample locations on a single torus chart sector. At all three locations the hysteresis loops generated by the true parameters (solid) and the identified parameters (dashed) are visually indistinguishable. 64 125 343 729 

Number of nodes 

0.00 

0.02 

0.04 

0.06 

0.08 

0.10 

0.12 

0.14 

> y error (\%)

(a) Mesh refinement 

25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

Iteration 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

> y estimate

(b) sensitivity      

> 0= 0.01
> 0= 0.05
> 0= 0.1
> 0= 0.5
> 0= 1.0

Fig. 18: Sensitivity studies. (a) 𝜏 𝑦 identification error versus mesh resolution; accuracy is consistent across all mesh sizes ( 𝑛 cells ∈ { 3, 4, 6, 8}). (b) 𝜏 𝑦 convergence trajectories for different initial smoothing parameters 𝜀 𝑠, start ; all values except 𝜀 𝑠, start = 1.0 converge to the correct yield stress. 32 WaiChing Sun a

The elastoplastic benchmark establishes two points. First, the chart-local P1 finite-element infrastructure extends without modification to nonlinear, history-dependent constitutive laws: the smooth return mapping (76), the autograd-computed consistent tangent, and the implicit-function-theorem sensitivity transfer all operate in the same reference-chart coordinates used for diffusion, confirming that the atlas is an operator-agnostic geometric substrate. Second, the two-stage decoupling exploits physically distinct sensitivity profiles: 𝜏 𝑦 is identifiable from monotonic displacements because it controls the onset of permanent deformation, while 𝐻 kin is identifiable from cyclic reaction forces because it governs the stress-space shift of the yield surface during load reversal. 

Remark 5 (Single-chart usage of inverse problem) Example 5 operates on a single torus chart sector rather than the full eight-chart atlas used in Example 3. This scope restriction is deliberate: the purpose of the elastoplastic inverse example is to verify that gradient-based parameter identification extends from hyperelastic to history-dependent constitutive laws, not to test multi-chart Schwarz coupling. Note that multi-chart Schwarz coupling under elastoplasticity for the forward problem is already demonstrated in Example 3 (Section 5.3), where displacement continuity at chart interfaces suffices. Extending the multi-chart Schwarz inverse framework to elastoplasticity would additionally require transmitting internal-variable fields (back-stress, accumulated plastic strain) across chart interfaces for consistent parameter sensitivity—a nontrivial extension that is left to future work. 

6 Discussion 

A number of key observations on the performance of the proposed methods and the relations between the proposed method and other alternative workflows are both reported in this section. 6.1 Comparison with alternative workflows In conventional finite-element workflows a difficult three-dimensional body is first turned into a volumetric mesh and then coupled to mature local basis functions and linear or nonlinear solvers [1]. The present atlas-based approach replaces the global volumetric meshing step with overlapping chart maps and level-set geometry, and the rabbit FEM baseline now shows concretely that classical FEM can operate within this atlas framework with full theoretical convergence: 𝑂 (ℎ2) rates consistent with theoretical expectations (from 1 .45 to 2 .10 across refinement levels). This makes the atlas a general-purpose tool for geometric representations used in PDE solvers. In particular, three specific findings from the rabbit head-to-head merit discussion. First, at matched accuracy the two methods are broadly competitive in wall-clock time (2 ,939 s for FEM at 𝑛 = 48 versus 3 ,659 s for the compact PINN), indicating that the atlas-plus-Schwarz infrastructure, not the local discretization, is the dominant cost driver. Second, the FEM requires roughly 8 .5× fewer neural-network evaluations than the PINN ( ∼23M cached versus ∼195M iterative), because the decoder networks are queried only during one-time geometric precomputation rather than at every training step. Third, the FEM provides a mesh-refinement convergence guarantee that the PINN does not, while the PINN avoids reference-domain mesh generation, stiffness-matrix assembly, and decoder inversion, and extends more naturally to nonlinear operators where matrix reassembly would be required at every Newton step. The closest PINN alternatives in the literature, such as XPINNs and FBPINNs [14, 15], also use decomposition to improve training, yet their partitions are primarily algorithmic. In contrast, the present atlas is geometry-first: the same chart structure is used to represent the domain, to generate collocation or quadrature, and to organize Schwarz communication. The rabbit benchmark and its FEM counterpart are the clearest evidence that this idea works in practice, because the same quality gates, the same Schwarz iteration logic, and the same partition-of-unity blending support both neural and classical local solvers on atlases with different chart counts, with consistent results. The present evidence therefore supports discretization-agnostic geometry representation, not universal accuracy or efficiency superiority. 6.2 Relation to isogeometric and multi-patch analysis The Piola-mapped operators used in this work—the pullback diffusion tensor A𝑖 = 𝑗 𝑖 J−1 

> 𝑖

J−𝑇 𝑖 and the Jacobian-weighted load vector—are standard in isogeometric analysis [5, 6] and in classical mapped finite elements [7]. The geometry-informed neural charts 33 

contribution is not the operator itself but the geometric substrate: neural volumetric charts replace NURBS patches or CAD-derived parametrizations, enabling atlas construction from point-cloud or level-set data without explicit meshing. The closest classical analogue to the present framework is multi-patch IGA [8], where multiple NURBS patches are coupled through mortar methods or penalty-based interface conditions. The overlap graph of the neural atlas plays the same structural role as the NURBS patch adjacency graph. Two key differences, however, distinguish the approaches. First, multi-patch IGA requires CAD-quality parametrizations with controlled distortion; the neural atlas instead learns its charts from point-cloud or SDF data, and the quality gates (coverage, overlap consistency, foldover ratio) serve as a posteriori substitutes for the a priori regularity guarantees of NURBS. Second, IGA patches are typically non-overlapping with shared interface curves, whereas the atlas charts overlap by design and communicate through multiplicative Schwarz coupling. This overlap structure simplifies the atlas construction—no watertight interface curves need to be computed—at the cost of requiring an iterative solver for inter-chart consistency. The rabbit FEM convergence study independently certifies that the neural atlas provides a mathematically correct coordinate substrate: the observed 𝑂 (ℎ2) rates confirm that the mapped diffusion tensor, Jacobian-weighted load vector, and Schwarz boundary exchange introduce no spurious accuracy degradation. This convergence result is analogous to the standard IGA verification of mapped operators on NURBS patches, but here the substrate is learned rather than constructed from CAD data. 

7 Conclusions 

This work introduces a geometry-informed atlas framework for boundary-value problems on complex three-dimensional domains without requiring a global volumetric mesh. The contribution is a unified computational pipeline in which geometry representation, mapped PDE operators, and inter-chart transmission are constructed and verified as one system. The rabbit benchmark provides the clearest evidence: two atlases generated by the same four-stage procedure—a twelve-chart atlas for the PINN and an eight-chart atlas for the FEM—both support a complex-geometry Poisson solve, while the atlas-based P1 FEM baseline recovers the expected 𝑂 (ℎ2) convergence (rates 1 .45–2 .10) and reaches relative 𝐿 2 error 1 .79 × 10 −2 at the finest refinement. These results indicate that the atlas acts as a reusable geometric substrate across local discretization families. At comparable accuracy, PINN and FEM wall-clock costs are of the same order, whereas the FEM uses roughly 8 .5× fewer neural-network evaluations ( ∼23M cached geometric queries versus ∼195M iterative training passes) and retains standard mesh-refinement convergence guarantees. The ellipsoid test verifies correctness of the mapped operator on analytic geometry, and the Stanford Bunny study shows that imported PLY data can be converted into a usable volumetric prior. The torus forward boundary-value problem demonstrates that the eight-chart Schwarz scheme supports nonlinear equilibrium with history-dependent 𝐽 2

elastoplasticity under cyclic loading, with Newton converging in 1–4 iterations per chart and interface displacement jumps of 𝑂 (10 −7). The torus inverse study confirms constitutive identification under prescribed kinematics, including a Schwarz variant in which eight chart-local parameter pairs converge to machine-precision consensus ( 𝜇 inter-chart std = 1.47 × 10 −13 ); the elastoplastic inverse extension recovers yield stress (0 .25% error) and kinematic hardening (2 .11% error) from cyclic data via a smooth return mapping. Overall, the atlas formulation is most advantageous when geometry acquisition or volumetric meshing is the dominant bottleneck. 

A Implementation transparency and hardware backends 

A.1 Hardware backends    

> The rabbit Poisson and torus inverse benchmarks were executed through PyTorch’s Metal backend on Apple hardware ( device=mps ,
> dtype=float32 ); the Schwarz dual torus runs used device=cpu with dtype=float64 . The codebase supports Metal, CUDA, and CPU backends through the same code path, and the concrete backend for each run is recorded in the corresponding metric file.

B Neural network architecture specifications       

> Table 11 lists the neural-network families used across the benchmarks, with configurations quoted from source code definitions and canonical checkpoint metadata. The geometry stage uses fully connected tanh MLPs with Xavier initialization. SDFNet learns a volumetric level-set for inside/outside queries and chart placement. MappingNet augments the same backbone with learned scale, translation, and capped displacement parameters;

34 WaiChing Sun a

Table 11: Neural-network families. Configurations are quoted from source code class definitions and canonical checkpoint metadata.       

> Name Purpose Type Configuration Reference
> SDFNet global volumetric level-set fully connected
> tanh MLP

3 → 1; width 128 , depth 6;Xavier initialization This work    

> MappingNet ball-to-domain map residual chart map on tanh MLP

3 → 3; width 128 , depth 6;learned scale, shift, capped displacement This work   

> ChartDecoder differentiable chart map fully connected
> tanh MLP with residual correction

3 → 3; width 64 , depth 4;residual amplitude 0.20 tanh (raw scale ) 𝑟 𝑖 This work    

> MaskNet chart-validity logits / PoU weights fully connected
> tanh MLP

3 → 1; width 48 , depth 3 This work   

> LocalPoisson PINN dense chart-local field fully connected
> tanh PINN

3 → 1; width 64 , depth 4;residual scale 0.1   

> PINN [39]; this work
> Compact ChartNet localized chart-local field mixture of small
> tanh MLPs + softmax PoU 9 subnets; each width

32 , depth 2;

𝜏 scale = 0.125 This work Configurations come from source definitions and canonical checkpoints. 

the ball-to-domain map is treated as a geometric prior rather than a bijection by construction. The SDF training loss uses a static weighted sum with 𝑤 surf = 10, 𝑤 eik = 1, 𝑤 norm = 1, 𝑤 sign = 2, without GradNorm or PCGrad. Each ChartDecoder refines a rigid seed-based local frame by a learned residual rather than learning the chart from scratch. It is paired with a MaskNet that generates validity logits and partition-of-unity weights. In the canonical rabbit workflow, decoder and mask networks are trained once during the atlas stage, screened by quality gates, and frozen before PDE training. The solver classes are distinct from the stabilization logic. PCGrad, trust-region rejection, and staged loss-weight schedules are implemented in the Schwarz training routine rather than in the network definitions. The torus inverse benchmark does not train a neural field; instead, it optimizes material parameters ( 𝜇, 𝐾 ) under fixed chart weights, with per-chart parameters in the Schwarz variant driven toward consensus by red–black alternating sweeps. 

C Global map training for simply connected domains 

For simply connected domains where a single volumetric parametrization is feasible, the atlas reduces to one chart with a global map 

Ψ𝜃 : 𝐵 3 → Ω, 𝐵 3 = {𝝃 ∈ R3 : ∥𝝃 ∥ < 1}. (63) When Ψ𝜃 is learned, the training objective combines a positive-determinant barrier, boundary-fidelity terms, and coefficient-regularity terms: 

Lmap = 𝛼 bij Lbij + 𝛼 geom Lgeom + 𝛼 coeff Lcoeff , (64) where Lbij penalizes small or negative Jacobian determinant, Lgeom keeps the boundary on the target geometry and the interior inside the domain, and Lcoeff regularizes the mapped operator coefficients induced by the chart Jacobian. In the code this loss is specialized further into bijectivity, ellipticity, isotropy, smoothness, and boundary terms. Algorithm 3 records the training pattern used by the special global-map pipeline. The ellipsoid verification case (Example 1) uses the same mapped-PDE machinery, but its global map is analytic rather than learned. 

D Atlas training losses 

This appendix provides the explicit training-loss expansions referenced in the atlas construction pipeline (Section 4.1). 

SDF training loss. For imported geometry with observed surface samples 𝑋 𝜕 = { ( 𝑥 𝑘 , n𝑘 ) } 𝑁 𝑘 =1 and oriented normals, the neural SDF 

𝑠 𝜗 is trained with the loss 

LSDF = 𝜆 surf E𝑥 ∼𝑋 𝜕 [ | 𝑠 𝜗 ( 𝑥 ) | ] + 𝜆 norm E( 𝑥, n)∼( 𝑋 𝜕 , 𝑁 𝜕 )



1 − ∇𝑠 𝜗 ( 𝑥 )∥ ∇ 𝑠 𝜗 ( 𝑥 ) ∥ 2

· n



+ 𝜆 eik E𝑥 ∼𝐵 

h ∥ ∇ 𝑠 𝜗 ( 𝑥 ) ∥ 2 − 12 i

+ 𝜆 sign Lsign , (65) geometry-informed neural charts 35 

Algorithm 3 Special-case training of a learned global volumetric map 

Inputs: reference ball 𝐵 3; target-domain surface and interior samples; initial map parameters 𝜃 ;optimizer O with learning-rate schedule 𝜂 (𝑡 )

> map

; loss weights 𝛼 bij , 𝛼 geom , 𝛼 coeff ; epoch budget 𝑇 map 

Output: best checkpoint map Ψ𝜃 : 𝐵 3 → Ω satisfying determinant and boundary checks on validation samples 1: for 𝑡 = 1, . . . , 𝑇 map do 

2: Sample interior points 𝝃 int ⊂ 𝐵 3 and boundary points 𝝃 𝜕 ⊂ 𝜕𝐵 3

3: Evaluate 𝑥 int = Ψ 𝜃 (𝝃 int ), 𝑥 𝜕 = Ψ 𝜃 (𝝃 𝜕 ), and J = 𝐷 𝝃 Ψ𝜃 

4: Assemble Lbij , Lgeom , and Lcoeff from (64) 5: Form Lmap = 𝛼 bij Lbij + 𝛼 geom Lgeom + 𝛼 coeff Lcoeff 

6: Compute the mapping-loss gradient 𝑔 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝜃

= ∇𝜃 Lmap ( 𝜃 (𝑡 ) )

7: Update the parameters with the chosen optimizer: 

𝜃 (𝑡 +1) ← Update O



𝜃 (𝑡 ) , 𝑔 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝜃

; 𝜂 (𝑡 )

> map



8: Record min 𝝃 det J(𝝃 ), boundary mismatch, and coefficient diagnostics for checkpointing 9: Keep the best checkpoint that preserves positive determinant and acceptable boundary fidelity on the validation batch 10: end for 

11: return the selected global map Ψ𝜃 

with sign supervision 

Lsign = 12 E( 𝑥, n)∼( 𝑋 𝜕 , 𝑁 𝜕 )

softplus  𝑠 𝜗 ( 𝑥 − 𝛿 n) + softplus   − 𝑠 𝜗 ( 𝑥 + 𝛿 n) 

+ 12 E𝑥 ∼𝐵 far 

softplus   − 𝑠 𝜗 ( 𝑥 ) . (66) The sign-anchor term is the most delicate on thin-featured geometry (e.g., the Stanford Bunny ears), where a single offset 𝛿 that works in the bulk may cross the surface in narrow regions. 

Atlas loss component terms. The composite atlas loss Latlas defined in (40) consists of the following components: 

Lrec =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

E𝑥 ∈𝑋 +

> 𝑖

∥Φ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 ( 𝑥 ) ) − 𝑥 ∥22

 , (67) 

Ldom =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

E𝜻 ∼[− 𝑟 𝑖 ,𝑟 𝑖 ]3

h

ReLU  𝑠 𝜗 (Φ𝑖 (𝜻 ) ) − 𝜏 sdf 

2 i

, (68) 

Lmask =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

E𝑥 ∈𝑋 +

> 𝑖

softplus   − ℓ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 ( 𝑥 ) )  +

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

E𝑥 ∈𝑋 −

> 𝑖

softplus  ℓ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 ( 𝑥 ) )  , (69) 

Lov =∑︁ 

> 𝑖< 𝑗

E𝑥 ∈𝑋 𝑖 𝑗 

∥Φ𝑖 (𝜻 𝑖 ( 𝑥 ) ) − Φ 𝑗 (𝜻 𝑗 ( 𝑥 ) ) ∥ 22

 , (70) 

Ljac =

> 𝑀

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

E𝜻 ∼bΩ𝑖 

h

softplus   𝛿 det − det 𝐷 Φ𝑖 (𝜻 )2 i

, (71) 

Lcov =E𝑥 ∼𝑋 



softplus  𝜏 cov − max  

> 𝑖

𝑝 𝑖 ( 𝑥 ) − log 𝜔 pri ( 𝑥 ) ( 𝑥 )



. (72) Here 𝑋 + 

> 𝑖

/𝑋 − 

> 𝑖

are samples inside/outside chart 𝑖 , 𝑋 𝑖 𝑗 are shared overlap points, and 𝜏 sdf is the tolerated signed-distance margin. Surface-based fitting uses Lrec , while the volumetric Bunny continuation uses Ldom .

E Elastoplastic constitutive model and smooth return mapping 

This appendix collects the elastoplastic constitutive equations used by Examples 3 and 5. The material is governed by finite-strain 𝐽 2

elastoplasticity with kinematic hardening, following the multiplicative framework of Simo and Hughes [2] and de Souza Neto et al. [1]. 

Kinematics. The deformation gradient admits the multiplicative decomposition 

F = F𝑒 F𝑝 , (73) where F𝑒 and F𝑝 denote the elastic and plastic parts, respectively. The elastic left Cauchy–Green tensor B𝑒 = F𝑒 (F𝑒 )𝑇 defines the elastic logarithmic strain 𝜺 𝑒 = 12 ln B𝑒 , from which the Kirchhoff stress is 

𝝉 = 2𝜇 dev (𝜺 𝑒 ) + 𝐾 tr (𝜺 𝑒 ) I. (74) 36 WaiChing Sun a

Yield function and flow rule. The von Mises yield function with kinematic hardening is 

Φ(𝝉 , 𝜷 ) =√︃ 32 ∥dev (𝝉 ) − 𝜷 ∥ − 𝜏 𝑦 , (75) where 𝜷 is the deviatoric back-stress tensor that tracks the center of the yield surface, and 𝜏 𝑦 is the yield stress. The back-stress evolves according to the Prager linear kinematic hardening rule: 𝜷 𝑛 +1 = 𝜷 𝑛 + 23 𝐻 kin Δ𝛾 N, where Δ𝛾 is the plastic multiplier and N = dev (𝝉 trial −

𝜷 𝑛 )/∥ dev (𝝉 trial − 𝜷 𝑛 ) ∥ is the flow direction. 

Smooth return mapping. The classical radial return algorithm [2] uses a conditional branch: if Φ > 0 (yield), compute a plastic correction; otherwise, accept the elastic trial state. This non-differentiable branching prevents gradient flow through the yield surface in a reverse-mode automatic-differentiation setting. We replace it with a smooth approximation: the plastic correction magnitude is set to 

Δ𝛾 𝑠 = softplus (Φ/𝜀 𝑠 ) · 𝜀 𝑠 , softplus ( 𝑥 ) = ln (1 + 𝑒 𝑥 ), (76) which provides a 𝐶 ∞ approximation to max (Φ, 0) [33, 40]. The sharpness parameter 𝜀 𝑠 controls the transition width and is annealed from 

𝜀 𝑠, start = 0.1 𝜏 𝑦 to 𝜀 𝑠, end = 0.001 𝜏 𝑦 via a cosine schedule. At 𝜀 𝑠 = 0.001, the softplus curve is visually indistinguishable from the sharp classical yield point (Figure 15a). With the classical hard-max return mapping ( Δ𝛾 𝑠 = max (Φ, 0)), autograd gradients are zero in the plastic regime and the optimizer stalls. The smooth return mapping is the key ingredient that enables both the forward Newton–Raphson solver (Example 3) and the inverse parameter identification (Example 5) to operate through the same constitutive code path: the autograd tape records the full algorithmic path through the return-mapping corrector, so the consistent algorithmic tangent for the forward solve and the parameter sensitivities for the inverse solve are both obtained automatically. 

F Solver stabilization details 

Two adaptive regularization constants govern robustness. The overlap weight follows 

𝑤 (𝑛 +1) 

> ov

= clip ©«

𝑤 (𝑛 )

> ov

L(𝑛 )

> cov

L(𝑛 ) 

> ov

+ 𝜀 

! 𝛽 

, 𝑤 min , 𝑤 max ª®¬

, (77) which increases overlap enforcement only when coverage is acceptable and the overlap loss is under-resolved. The CompactChartNet bandwidth follows a continuation schedule 

𝜏 (𝑛 ) 

> scale

= 𝜏 max −  𝜏 max − 𝜏 min 

 min 



1, 𝑛 𝑁 warm 



, (78) starting wide during warmup and contracting after boundary and interface losses stabilize. The rabbit solver uses three additional stabilization devices: (i) staged PDE-weight ramping so that Dirichlet and interface terms settle before the stiff residual dominates, (ii) PCGrad [36] when PDE and manufactured-anchor gradients conflict, and (iii) a trust-region filter that rejects local Schwarz updates causing unacceptable error increases and reduces the local learning rate after rejection. A curvature-weighted simplification evaluates the Laplacian directly in chart coordinates when the local metric distortion satisfies ∥J𝑇 𝑖 J𝑖 − I∥2 ≤ 𝜀 𝑔 ; the induced operator error is first-order in 𝜀 𝑔 and controlled by the atlas quality gate. 

G Rabbit Poisson benchmark: supplementary tables 

Table 12: Reinforcement progression for the rabbit Poisson benchmark. Each row adds one stabilization ingredient cumulatively.    

> Configuration Added ingredient Best rel.

𝐿 2 Max error Runtime W1 direct-coordinate PDE evaluation 3.698% 4.107% 364 s W2 + manufactured-solution anchor 3.165% 4.993% 335 s W3 + plateau detection by rel. 𝐿 2 3.117% 8.485% 328 s W5 + stronger flux coupling 3.631% 5.450% 371 s W4 + PCGrad on PDE/supervision conflict 2.531% 5.303% 404 s CompactChartNet all W1–W5 features active 2.207% 6.783% 3659 s geometry-informed neural charts 37 

H Stanford Bunny volumetric neural SDF benchmark 

For completeness, the procedure of generating the signed distance function of the Stanford Bunny is documented here. The input is an oriented surface sample set 𝑋 𝜕 = { ( 𝑥 𝑘 , n𝑘 ) } 𝑁 𝑠  

> 𝑘 =1

obtained from the watertight mesh bun zipper.ply . The goal is to learn a volumetric scalar field whose zero level set captures the Bunny surface and whose sign defines a usable interior for atlas construction—i.e., the benchmark instantiation of Stage 1 of the atlas construction pipeline (Section 4.1.1). Let 𝑦 = ( 𝑥 − 𝑐 )/ 𝑠 denote the normalized coordinate, where 𝑐 is the bounding-box center and 𝑠 the global length scale. The learned volumetric model 𝑠 𝜃 : R3 → R defines the reconstructed body as 

Ω𝜃 = { 𝑥 : 𝑠 𝜃 ( ( 𝑥 − 𝑐 )/ 𝑠 ) < 0}, 𝜕 Ω𝜃 = { 𝑥 : 𝑠 𝜃 ( ( 𝑥 − 𝑐 )/ 𝑠 ) = 0}. (79) The training loss combines surface fit, normal alignment, Eikonal regularization, and sign-anchor supervision: 

Lsurf = 1

𝑁 𝑠 𝑁 𝑠 ∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

|𝑠 𝜃 ( 𝑦 𝑘 ) | , Lnorm = 1

𝑁 𝑠 𝑁 𝑠 ∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1



1 − ∇𝑦 𝑠 𝜃 ( 𝑦 𝑘 ) · n𝑘 



, (80) 

Leik = 1

𝑁 𝑒 𝑁 𝑒 ∑︁ 

> 𝑚 =1

 ∥ ∇ 𝑦 𝑠 𝜃 ( ˜𝑦 𝑚 ) ∥ 2 − 12 , (81) 

Lsign = 12𝑁 𝑠 𝑁 𝑠 ∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

softplus  𝑠 𝜃 ( 𝑦 𝑘 − 𝛿 n𝑘 ) + softplus   − 𝑠 𝜃 ( 𝑦 𝑘 + 𝛿 n𝑘 ) + Lfar , (82) with total loss L(3) = 𝜆 surf Lsurf + 𝜆 eik Leik + 𝜆 norm Lnorm + 𝜆 sign Lsign . On thin features such as the Bunny ears, the sign-anchor term is the most fragile because a single offset 𝛿 can easily step across the local thickness. The canonical run reduces the surface loss to 1 .66 × 10 −2 and the normal-alignment loss to 3 .18 × 10 −2, while the sign-anchor loss decreases only to 3 .11 × 10 −1 and the Eikonal loss remains at 7 .29 × 10 −1. The zero level set captures the bulk geometry well enough to support chart placement, but thin-ear volumetric sign control remains the dominant failure mode. A downstream 8-chart Bunny Poisson continuation study (Table 13) clarifies what “usable” means: the no-pretraining baseline stalls at relative 𝐿 2 error 31 .5%, whereas 20k interior-pretraining epochs reduce it to 4 .73%. The main gain comes from pretraining quality rather than long-horizon Schwarz improvement. 

Table 13: 8-chart Stanford Bunny Poisson continuation study. All runs use the repaired Bunny atlas and CompactChart-Net; the primary variable is the number of interior supervised pretraining epochs before Schwarz iteration.                                      

> Run Interior pretrain Best rel.
> 𝐿 2Max error Best iter Final flux Runtime No pretrain 031.53% 22.04% 12.15 ×10 −1849 s 5k pretrain 5k 6.83% 4.78% 31.37 ×10 −22426 s 10k pretrain 10k 5.03% 4.41% 14 1.86 ×10 −24235 s 20k pretrain 20k 4.73% 3.99% 19 9.59 ×10 −37420 s

Acknowledgments 

The author is supported by the Dynamic Materials and Interactions Program from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, USA, under grant contract FA9550-22-1-0310, and by the United States Army Research Office under grant contract W911NF-24-1-0011. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the sponsors, including the Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes, notwithstanding any copyright notation herein. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The author declares no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

An anonymized artifact package containing scripts, canonical run registries, metric tables, and verification manifests is provided for peer review as supplementary material. Upon acceptance, the full repository and archived benchmark artifacts will be released publicly with a persistent DOI. 38 WaiChing Sun a

References 

1. Eduardo A de Souza Neto, Djordje Peric, and David RJ Owen. Computational methods for plasticity: theory and applications . John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 2. J.C. Simo and T.J.R. Hughes. Computational Inelasticity , volume 7 of Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics . Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998. ISBN 0-387-97520-9. doi: 10.1007/b98904. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/b98904 .3. O.C. Zienkiewicz and R.L. Taylor. The Finite Element Method Volume 2: Solid Mechanics. 2:476, 2000. 4. R. Quey, P.R. Dawson, and F. Barbe. Large-scale 3d random polycrystals for the finite element method: Generation, meshing and remeshing. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 200(17-20):1729–1745, April 2011. ISSN 0045-7825. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2011.01.002. 5. T.J.R. Hughes, J.A. Cottrell, and Y. Bazilevs. Isogeometric analysis: Cad, finite elements, nurbs, exact geometry and mesh refinement. 

Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 194(39-41):4135–4195, 2005. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2004.10.008. 6. J. A. Cottrell, T. J. R. Hughes, and Y. Bazilevs. Isogeometric Analysis: Toward Integration of CAD and FEA . John Wiley & Sons, 2009. 7. Philippe G. Ciarlet. The Finite Element Method for Elliptic Problems . Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2nd edition, 2002. 8. Ericka Brivadis, Annalisa Buffa, Barbara Wohlmuth, and Linus Wunderlich. Isogeometric mortar methods. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 284:292–319, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2014.09.012. 9. Andreas Apostolatos, Robert Schmidt, Roland W¨ uchner, and Kai-Uwe Bletzinger. A nitsche-type formulation and comparison of the most common domain decomposition methods in isogeometric analysis. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering ,97(7):473–504, 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2013.08.015. 10. M. Dittmann, S. Schuß, B. Wohlmuth, and C. Hesch. Weak ¡i¿c¡/i¿¡sup¿¡i¿n¡/i¿¡/sup¿ coupling for multipatch isogeometric analysis in solid mechanics. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 118(11):678–699, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2018.08. 042. 11. Alfio Quarteroni and Alberto Valli. Domain decomposition methods for partial differential equations . Oxford University Press, 1999. 12. A. Toselli and O. B. Widlund. Domain Decomposition Methods—Algorithms and Theory , volume 34 of Springer Series in Computational Mathematics . Springer, 2005. 13. Ameya D. Jagtap and George Em Karniadakis. Extended physics-informed neural networks (xpinns): A generalized space-time domain decomposition based deep learning framework for nonlinear partial differential equations. Communications in Computational Physics ,28(5):2002–2041, 2020. doi: 10.4208/cicp.oa-2020-0164. 14. Khemraj Shukla, Ameya D. Jagtap, and George Em Karniadakis. Parallel physics-informed neural networks via domain decomposition. 

Journal of Computational Physics , 447:110683, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110683. 15. Ben Moseley, Andrew Markham, and Tarje Nissen-Meyer. Finite basis physics-informed neural networks (fbpinns): a scalable domain decomposition approach for solving differential equations. Advances in Computational Mathematics , 49(4):62, 2023. doi: 10.1007/ s10444-023-10065-9. 16. Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, Guofei Pang, Zhongqiang Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Learning nonlinear operators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. Nature Machine Intelligence , 3(3):218–229, 2021. doi: 10.1038/s42256-021-00302-5. 17. Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhatt, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. 18. Zongyi Li, Hongkai Zheng, Nikola Kovachki, David Jin, Haoxuan Chen, Burigede Liu, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anand-kumar. Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial differential equations. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(112): 1–46, 2024. 19. Trenton Kirchdoerfer and Michael Ortiz. Data-driven computational mechanics. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 304:81–101, 2016. 20. Yoshihiro Kanno. Alternating minimization for data-driven computational elasticity from experimental data: kernel method for learning constitutive manifold. Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters , 11(5):100289, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.taml.2021.100289. 21. Xiaolong He, Qizhi He, Jiun-Shyan Chen, Usha Sinha, and Shantanu Sinha. Physics-constrained local convexity data-driven modeling of anisotropic nonlinear elastic solids. Data-Centric Engineering , 1, 2020. doi: 10.1017/dce.2020.20. 22. Nikolaos N. Vlassis and WaiChing Sun. Sobolev training of thermodynamic-informed neural networks for interpretable elasto-plasticity models with level set hardening. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 377:113695, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2021.113695. 23. Jan N. Fuhg, Govinda Anantha Padmanabha, Nikolaos Bouklas, Bahador Bahmani, WaiChing Sun, Nikolaos N. Vlassis, Moritz Flaschel, Pietro Carrara, and Laura De Lorenzis. A review on data-driven constitutive laws for solids. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering , 32(3):1841–1883, 2025. doi: 10.1007/s11831-023-10009-y. 24. Bahador Bahmani and WaiChing Sun. Manifold embedding data-driven mechanics. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids ,166:104927, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2022.104927. 25. Mian Xiao and WaiChing Sun. Geometric prior of multi-resolution yielding manifolds and the local closest point projection for nearly non-smooth plasticity. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 400:115469, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2022.115469. 26. Wu-Rong Jian, Mian Xiao, WaiChing Sun, and Wei Cai. Prediction of yield surface of single crystal copper from discrete dislocation dynamics and geometric learning. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 186:105577, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2024.105577. 27. Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 165–174, 2019. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2019.00025. 28. Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4455–4465, 2019. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2019.00459. 29. Francis Williams, Teseo Schneider, Claudio Silva, Denis Zorin, Joan Bruna, and Daniele Panozzo. Deep geometric prior for surface reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10122–10131, 2019. geometry-informed neural charts 39 doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2019.01037. 30. Francisco Sahli Costabal, Simone Navarro, and Claudio Kammann. Δ-PINNs: Physics-informed neural networks on complex geometries. 

Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 422:116961, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2024.116761. 31. John M. Lee. Introduction to Smooth Manifolds , volume 218 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics . Springer, New York, 2 edition, 2012. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-9982-5. 32. Pierre-Louis Lions. On the Schwarz alternating method. I. In Roland Glowinski, Gene H. Golub, Gerard A. Meurant, and Jacques Periaux, editors, Domain Decomposition Methods for Partial Differential Equations . SIAM, Philadelphia, 1988. 33. Yuanming Hu, Luke Anderson, Tzu-Mao Li, Qi Sun, Nathan Carr, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, and Fr´ ed´ eric Durand. DiffTaichi: Differen-tiable programming for physical simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 39(4), 2020. doi: 10.1145/3386569.3392421. 34. A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32(721):8026–8037, 2019. 35. Greg Turk and Marc Levoy. Zippered polygon meshes from range images. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , pages 311–318, 1994. doi: 10.1145/192161.192241. 36. Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn. Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:5824–5836, 2020. 37. Sifan Wang, Shyam Sankaran, Hanwen Wang, and Paris Perdikaris. An expert’s guide to training physics-informed neural networks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08468 , 2023. 38. Behzad Bahmani and WaiChing Sun. Training multi-objective/multi-task collocation physics-informed neural network with studen-t/teachers transfer learnings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.11496 , 2021. 39. M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G.E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 378:686–707, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. 40. Georgios Barkoulis Gavris and WaiChing Sun. Discovering neural elastoplasticity from kinematic observations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(38), 2025. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2508732122.