Title: LivingWorld: Interactive 4D World Generation with Environmental Dynamics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01641v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:35:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# LivingWorld: Interactive 4D World Generation with Environmental Dynamics 

Hyeongju Mun 1* , In-Hwan Jin 1* , Sohyeong Kim 1 , and Kyeongbo Kong 1†

> 1

Pusan National University 

{201924128, ihjin, soh9119, kbkong}@pusan.ac.kr  

> *

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. Project page: https://paper.pnu-cvsp.com/LivingWorld/ 

Fig. 1: LivingWorld generates a dynamic 4D world with environmental dy-namics from a single image. Our geometry-aware alignment module maintains globally coherent scene dynamics as the world progressively expands. 

Abstract. We introduce LivingWorld , an interactive framework for generating 4D worlds with environmental dynamics from a single image. While recent advances in 3D scene generation enable large-scale environ-ment creation, most approaches focus primarily on reconstructing static geometry, leaving scene-scale environmental dynamics such as clouds, water, or smoke largely unexplored. Modeling such dynamics is challeng-ing because motion must remain coherent across an expanding scene while supporting low-latency user feedback. LivingWorld addresses this challenge by progressively constructing a globally coherent motion field as the scene expands. To maintain global consistency during expansion, we introduce a geometry-aware alignment module that resolves directional and scale ambiguities across views. We further represent motion using a compact hash-based motion field, enabling efficient querying and stable propagation of dynamics throughout the scene. This representation also supports bidirectional motion propagation during rendering, producing long and temporally coherent 4D sequences without relying on expen-sive video-based refinement. On a single RTX 5090 GPU, generating each new scene expansion step requires 9 seconds, followed by 3 seconds for motion alignment and motion field updates, enabling interactive 4D world generation with globally coherent environmental dynamics. Video demonstrations are available at cvsp-lab.github.io/LivingWorld .

Keywords: Interactive 4D World Generation · Environmental Dynamics Modeling · Global Motion Fields  

> arXiv:2604.01641v1 [cs.CV] 2 Apr 2026 2H. Mun et al.

# 1 Introduction 

Recent advances in 3D representation [1, 2] and generative modeling [3, 4] have enabled the interactive creation of large-scale virtual environments from min-imal visual input. Such systems [5] allow users to construct and manipulate complex scenes in real time, supporting open-ended world generation and sig-nificantly lowering the barrier to 3D content creation. However, most existing approaches generate worlds that remain fundamentally static, focusing primarily on reconstructing geometry and appearance while leaving the environment itself motionless. In many real-world environments, certain environmental processes are inher-ently dynamic. Rivers flow, waves propagate along coastlines, and clouds drift across the sky. These phenomena are not merely moving objects within a scene but environmental dynamics that are intrinsically tied to the scene itself. Ignoring such dynamics leads to environments that may appear visually plausible yet fail to faithfully reflect how real-world environments behave. This limitation becomes increasingly significant as interactive world generation is explored in applications such as perception, simulation, and embodied intelligence, where environments must capture not only appearance but also dynamic characteristics. However, modeling environmental dynamics in interactive world generation remains challenging. Such motions often span large spatial regions and evolve continuously over time. As scenes expand progressively, motion guidance must be determined while accounting for how previously generated dynamics influence the evolving environment. This creates a feedback-driven process in which motion must remain globally coherent while being updated interactively. To support such interaction, the motion representation must maintain spatial and temporal consistency across the scene while allowing efficient updates so that users can observe the resulting dynamics and refine their guidance in real time. A closely related line of research explores controllable video generation [6 –8], where camera trajectories or motion controls are used to synthesize temporally coherent image sequences. While these approaches can produce visually compelling videos, they typically generate image sequences without constructing an explicit and persistent 3D world representation. As a result, maintaining geometrically consistent dynamics across viewpoints becomes difficult, particularly when the scene is expanded or revisited from new viewpoints. Another line of research [9] models motion using Eulerian representations [10 – 12], originally developed for optical flow. These approaches extend Eulerian motion models to 4D scene generation by associating motion with spatial points in 3D space. Although they enforce geometric consistency through multi-view flow estimation, they often rely on iterative refinement driven by video supervision, where motion is optimized indirectly through appearance reconstruction. Such optimization-based pipelines introduce significant computational overhead and reduce responsiveness in interactive settings, making it difficult to provide immediate visual feedback during scene creation. To address these limitations, we propose LivingWorld , an interactive frame-work that constructs environmental dynamics within an explicit 3D scene represen-LivingWorld 3

tation (Fig. 1). Rather than recovering motion through video-driven appearance reconstruction, LivingWorld represents motion as a spatial scene-level motion field and progressively updates it as the scene expands. Given user-provided motion prompts, the system estimates motion cues from newly generated views and consolidates them into a unified scene-level motion field. To maintain consis-tency across views, we introduce a geometry-aware alignment module that helps resolve directional and scale ambiguities in 3D space. We further represent motion using a compact hash-based motion field, enabling efficient querying and stable propagation of motion throughout the scene. This representation also supports bidirectional motion propagation during rendering, allowing long and temporally coherent 4D sequences to be produced without additional video-driven refinement. Together, these design choices enable globally consistent environmental dynamics to be constructed within seconds, enabling interactive 4D world generation with fast visual feedback. While our approach focuses on environmental motion that governs large-scale scene dynamics, it establishes a scene-level dynamic founda-tion onto which foreground object motions can be integrated using object-centric motion models. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

– We introduce LivingWorld , an interactive framework for generating 4D worlds from a single image that models environmental dynamics as a scene-level motion field. 

– We propose a geometry-aware alignment module that consolidates motion cues from newly generated views into a globally consistent 3D motion representation. 

– We design a hash-based motion field with bidirectional motion prop-agation , enabling fast motion field construction and stable spatio-temporal motion propagation across the scene. 

# 2 Related Works 

2.1 3D Scene Generation 

The goal of 3D scene generation is to synthesize explorable and coherent en-vironments from limited inputs such as single images or text prompts. Early methods focused on expanding static scenes from a single image [13, 14]. With the emergence of diffusion-based generative models, recent work has progressed toward world-scale scene generation and procedural environment construction. Some approaches aim to directly synthesize expansive environments through terrain generation and structured layout modeling [15–17]. Another dominant paradigm follows a render–refine–repeat pipeline, where scenes are iteratively rendered, refined using depth alignment, and updated with newly predicted geometry. Text2Room [18] applies this strategy to gen-erate mesh-based indoor environments from text prompts. LucidDreamer [19] and Text2Immersion [20] extend this paradigm to realistic indoor-to-outdoor environments using Gaussian Splatting [1]. WonderJourney [21] further incorpo-rates large language models to generate semantically diverse and interconnected scenes. WonderWorld [5] introduces an interactive framework that allows users 4 H. Mun et al. 

to progressively construct large-scale 3D environments. Despite these advances, existing approaches primarily focus on reconstructing static geometry. While such representations can produce visually plausible environments, they do not explicitly model environmental motion, causing the generated worlds to remain static. As a result, incorporating temporally coherent environmental dynamics into interactive 3D environments remains an open challenge, motivating the need for interactive 4D world generation. 

2.2 Single Image Animation 

Single-image animation aims to generate dynamic visual effects from static images, particularly for natural phenomena such as clouds, water, or smoke. Early ap-proaches relied on manual layer decomposition or simple physical models [22, 23]. Later works adopted deep neural networks to infer motion fields directly from static images [24, 25]. Holynski et al. [10] proposed an Eulerian-based model that predicts dense looping flow fields for realistic image animations. Subsequent research introduced controllable motion generation through semantic guidance. Text2Cinemagraph [11] and StyleCineGAN [12] enable text-driven or style-guided motion synthesis, while diffusion-based approaches further improve temporal realism and controllability [9, 26 – 28]. Recent diffusion-based motion generation models [6 –8] can synthesize motion from static images, producing visually rich an-imations with plausible environmental dynamics and camera movement. However, these approaches synthesize image sequences without maintaining an explicit and persistent 3D scene representation, making it difficult to ensure geomet-ric consistency across viewpoints or during scene expansion. To address this limitation, several works attempt to incorporate 3D structure for improved spa-tial consistency. 3D-Cinemagraphy [29] and Make-It-4D [30] infer pseudo 3D scene flow from depth-based layer decomposition, which often leads to geometric distortions under large viewpoint changes. 4DGS-Cinemagraphy [9] introduces a Gaussian Splatting representation to maintain multi-view consistency, but relies on rendering-based optimization to recover motion, resulting in substantial computational overhead. 

2.3 4D Scene Generation 

Generating temporally coherent and geometrically consistent 4D scenes remains a challenging problem in computer vision and graphics. Early works extended static 3D representations into dynamic sequences by transferring motion priors from video diffusion models. MAV3D [31] introduced a hybrid score distillation framework to inject temporal motion into 3D assets, while subsequent studies improved motion fidelity through trajectory-aware optimization and refined score-distillation strategies [32 –35]. Although these approaches produce visually compelling results, they typically focus on object-centric or bounded scenes and struggle to maintain stable dynamics under large viewpoint changes or long camera trajectories. More recent works attempt to extend diffusion-based generation to dynamic 4D scenes with explicit scene representations. CAT4D [36] leverages a multi-view video diffusion model to synthesize temporally consistent multi-view videos from LivingWorld 5 

> Fig. 2: Overall framework of the proposed method. Starting from the previ-ous 4D scene, the environment is progressively expanded through camera movement and outpainting. Motion cues estimated from user-guided masks are aligned using a geometry-aware alignment module and integrated into a hash-based motion field, enabling bidirectional motion propagation for temporally coherent 4D scenes.

monocular video inputs, which are then used to optimize a 4D Gaussian Splatting representation. Another line of work explores hybrid frameworks that combine physical simulation with generative models. WonderPlay [37] and Perpetual-Wonder [38] reconstruct a coarse 3D scene from a single image and generate physical states using a simulator. These states are used as conditioning signals for a video generation model to synthesize multi-view videos, which subsequently supervise the optimization of dynamic Gaussian representations. Despite their different formulations, these approaches ultimately rely on generated videos as supervision to infer motion in 3D. Such video-driven optimization introduces significant computational overhead and limits the ability to incorporate user feedback in interactive environments. In contrast, our method directly constructs environmental motion within a continuous 3D scene representation without rely-ing on video supervision. This design enables rapid updates of scene-level motion fields, allowing user feedback to be incorporated efficiently during interactive world generation. 

# 3 Method 

Section 3.1 first provides an overview of the proposed framework. Next, Section 3.2 presents our motion estimation and geometry-aware alignment that consolidate view-dependent motion cues into a spatially consistent representation. Section 3.3 then introduces the global motion field used to represent environmental dynamics across the scene. Finally, Section 3.4 describes the motion propagation and rendering strategy that maintains temporally coherent dynamics during scene expansion. 

3.1 Overview 

Starting from a single input image, an initial 3D scene is generated and pro-gressively expanded as new views are synthesized. Camera poses Cgen and text prompts U guide the spatial and semantic expansion of the scene, while sparse motion cues specify regions that should exhibit dynamic behavior. As illustrated in Fig. 2, LivingWorld progressively expands the scene by generating new views. 6 H. Mun et al. 

For each newly generated view, the system performs three stages: motion estima-tion and alignment, scene-level motion field update, and motion propagation and rendering. For each generated view Ii, we first estimate a dense image-space motion field 

Fi using an Eulerian estimation model and lift it into 3D using the predicted depth Di, producing sparse scene-flow samples Si. Since motion is estimated independently for each view, the resulting scene flows may exhibit inconsistencies across views. To address this, we introduce a geometry-aware motion alignment module that estimates a global similarity transformation to align the current scene flow Si with previously accumulated motion samples. The aligned flows are used to update a scene-level motion field Fθ that models motion as a spatial velocity function. During rendering, Gaussians are advected through Euler integration by querying the motion field, enabling coherent motion propagation across the scene. This allows evolving environmental dynamics to be visualized as the scene grows, enabling users to observe motion and guide subsequent scene expansion. 

3.2 Motion Estimation and Alignment 

To construct motion in an expanding 3D scene, we first estimate motion cues from generated views and align them to obtain consistent 3D scene flows. 

Eulerian Motion Estimation. We adopt an Eulerian flow representation [10], widely used in single-image animation to model fluid-like dynamics. Unlike La-grangian approaches that explicitly track the trajectories of particles or primitives, Eulerian flow assigns a velocity vector to each spatial location. Given an image I, the model predicts a per-pixel motion field Mt(x) that represents the instantaneous velocity at location x and time t. Future pixel positions are obtained via Euler integration: 

xt+1 = xt + Mt(xt), (1) where xt denotes the pixel coordinates at time t. To compute cumulative dis-placement from the initial frame, the flow is recursively integrated: 

F0→t(x0) = F0→t−1(x0) + Mt(x0 + F0→t−1(x0)) , (2) where F0→t(·) denotes the accumulated flow from time 0 to t. This formulation enables motion to be estimated directly in image space using only velocity predictions. We denote the Eulerian flow predictor as EF (·) and apply it to each generated view Ii to obtain a 2D motion field 

Fi = EF (Ii). (3) In interactive scenarios, users can optionally specify motion regions through seed points {pi} that indicate where dynamic behavior should occur. These points are converted into binary masks {mi} using a segmentation model such as SAM [39], and directional guidance {hi} specifies the expected flow orientation. These view-wise motion fields provide image-space motion cues for the scene. In LivingWorld 7

the next stage, they are lifted into 3D and aligned across views to construct a spatially consistent motion representation. 

Geometry-Aware Alignment Module. The motion fields Fi for each gen-erated view are estimated independently. After lifting them into 3D using the corresponding depth maps Di via unprojection, we obtain sparse scene-flow sam-ples Si for each view Ii. However, because these flows are estimated independently, the resulting 3D motion vectors often exhibit inconsistencies in direction and magnitude even across geometrically similar regions (Fig. 3). A related align-ment objective has been explored in 4DGS-Cinemagraphy (3D-MOM) [9], which enforces cross-view consistency by optimizing reprojected 2D flows. However, since this approach relies on random initialization and image-space supervision, it may suffer from slow convergence and unstable alignment in non-overlapping or view-specific regions.   

> Fig. 3: Geometry-Aware Alignment Module for resolving local ambiguity and propagating temporally consistent motion.

We establish spatial correspondences by reprojecting 3D samples from the cur-rent view into previously generated views. To enforce spatial consistency, we align the current scene flow Si with previously accumulated flows 

Sprev = {S1, . . . , Si−1}.

We formulate the alignment as estimating the optimal rotation R ∈ SO (3) and uni-form scale s that minimize the discrepancy between corresponding motion vectors: 

arg min 

> R,s

X

> k∈M

S(k) 

> prev

− sRS (k)

> i
> 2

, (4) where M denotes the set of spatial corre-spondences between the current and previ-ously generated scenes. We solve this prob-lem using the Kabsch algorithm [40], which provides a closed-form solution for the optimal rotation via singular value decom-position (SVD). The scale parameter s is estimated through a one-dimensional least-squares solution. Since the Kabsch algorithm has linear complexity with respect to the number of points, this yields a fast and stable alignment procedure. To further reduce residual discrepancies, we perform a lightweight gradient-based refinement step. This alignment module consolidates independently estimated motion cues into a globally consistent 3D motion representation, providing stable supervision for learning the continuous motion field described in the next section. 

3.3 Global Motion Field 

Dynamic scene modeling with Gaussian representations has been explored in several recent works. Methods such as deformation networks [41, 42] and time-conditioned neural fields [43] model temporal dynamics by predicting deformation 8 H. Mun et al. 

parameters for each Gaussian primitive. These approaches follow a Lagrangian 

formulation that explicitly tracks the motion of individual primitives over time. While expressive, this representation tightly couples motion modeling with the number of Gaussians, typically requiring dense video supervision and costly optimization over thousands of primitives. In contrast, we adopt an Eulerian formulation extended to 3D space. Rather than estimating motion for each Gaussian independently, we learn a continuous motion field  Fθ : R3 → R3 that maps any spatial location  x to a velocity vector. This representation decouples motion estimation from individual primitives, al-lowing motion to be queried directly at arbitrary spatial locations. As a result, Gaussian motion can be updated efficiently without per-Gaussian optimization, enabling scalable motion propagation across dynamically expanding scenes. How-ever, modeling Eulerian flow in unstructured 3D space presents two challenges: (1) 3D space lacks a regular grid structure, and (2) motion supervision is available only sparsely through estimated scene-flow samples. 

Hash-based Motion Field To efficiently represent motion in unstructured space and allow the field to generalize from sparse scene-flow supervision, we parameterize the motion field using a multi-resolution hash encoding [44] together with a lightweight MLP. At each resolution level, the input position  x ∈ R3 is discretized and mapped into a compact hash table via spatial hashing: 

hℓ(x) = 



> 3

M

> j=1

⌊xℓj ⌋ · πj

 mod T,  (5) where  πj are large primes,  L denotes bitwise XOR, and  T is the size of the hash table (e.g.,  T = 2 19 ). This produces feature indices into learnable embedding tables across multiple resolutions. Features from all levels are interpolated and concatenated, and the aggregated feature vector is passed to an MLP to regress the motion: 

Fθ (x) = MLP θ

> L

M

> ℓ=1

Interp ℓ (HashEnc ℓ(x)) 

!

. (6) Given sparse scene flow samples  {(xi, si)}Ni=1 , the model is trained with a simple regression objective: 

Lmotion =

> N

X

> i=1

∥Fθ (xi) − si∥22 . (7) The aligned scene flows obtained from the previous stage provide sparse yet globally consistent supervision for learning this field. Once trained,  Fθ predicts temporally coherent motion vectors for arbitrary spatial locations, allowing motion to be efficiently applied to all Gaussian primitives without per-Gaussian optimization. LivingWorld 9

3.4 Motion Propagation and Rendering 

Although the learned motion field provides continuous velocity predictions, di-rectly advecting Gaussian primitives along the field over time introduces several practical challenges. When Gaussians are warped according to the motion field, their spatial distribution gradually deviates from the original reconstructed scene structure. Since our framework does not rely on generating additional video supervision or iterative refinement to fill missing regions, this process may leave density gaps in the scene as Gaussians move away from their initial locations. 

Bidirectional Motion Propagation. To alleviate this issue, we propagate Gaussians along the motion field in both forward and backward directions, forming a temporally symmetric motion cycle. Similar to Eulerian flow integration in image space (Eqs. 1, 2), we update the position of each Gaussian using discrete Euler integration over the learned motion field  Fθ : R3 → R3.Given a Gaussian primitive  g with center position  pg (t) ∈ R3 at time  t, we define its bidirectional trajectories using forward and backward integration: 

pfg (t) = pfg (t − 1) + ψ ⊙ Fθ

 pfg (t − 1) , (8) 

pbg (t) = pbg (t − 1) − ψ ⊙ Fθ

 pbg (t − 1) , (9) where  ψ ∈ R3 denotes a per-axis step size vector, and  ⊙ indicates element-wise multiplication. Forward integration advects Gaussians along the predicted velocity direction, while backward integration propagates motion in the opposite direction. This bidirectional formulation allows the motion trajectories to loop back toward the initial configuration, helping maintain spatial coverage of the Gaussian distribution without introducing additional scene supervision. After computing both trajectories, we construct the final Gaussian set by temporally aligning the forward and backward paths:                 

> P(t) = pfg(t),pbg(T−t)|mg= 1 ∪pstatic
> g|mg= 0 .

(10) Only Gaussians within motion regions ( mg = 1 ) are updated and merged, while static ones remain fixed, reducing unnecessary rendering overhead. This bidirectional formulation maintains spatial coverage of the Gaussian distribution and improves temporal stability during long-term motion propagation. During rendering, both forward and backward trajectories contribute to the final scene representation. To smoothly transition between them, we modulate their opacities using a time-dependent blending weight w(t) ∈ [0 , 1] with a linear schedule w(t) = t/T :

˜αfg (t) =  1 − w(t) αfg (t), (11) 

˜αbg (t) = w(t) αbg (T − t). (12) This complementary opacity weighting gradually shifts the dominant contribution from the forward trajectory to the backward trajectory over time. As a result, the scene smoothly returns to its initial configuration while maintaining stable volumetric compositing during rendering. 10 H. Mun et al.                     

> Category Method PhysReal ( ↑)PhotoReal ( ↑)Time (s)
> Video Gen. Veo 3.1 [6] 0.86 0.90 140 CogVideoX [8] 0.80 0.87 1404 Tora [7] 0.82 0.86 546 4D Scene 4DGS-Cinemagraphy [9] 0.83 0.90 2100
> LivingWorld(Ours) 0.87 0.94 12

Table 1: Comparison of environmental dynamics realism and visual quality across video generation and 4D scene-based methods. 

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Baselines 

In principle, we aim to compare our framework against existing state-of-the-art methods. However, to the best of our knowledge, no prior work directly addresses the task of interactive 4D world generation from a single image with controllable camera and motion hints. Therefore, we organize the baselines into two groups that reflect the closest related research directions discussed in Sec. 1. 

Video Generation Baselines. Recent controllable video generation models can synthesize temporally coherent videos conditioned on camera motion or control signals. We include three representative methods from this line of work: Veo 3.1 [6], CogVideoX [8] and Tora [7]. Although these models produce visually compelling videos, they do not construct an explicit 3D scene representation or motion field. As a result, they cannot maintain geometrically consistent dynamics across viewpoints or support scene expansion. Following prior work, we therefore evaluate them using non-reference metrics that assess perceptual quality and physical plausibility of the generated videos. 

4D Scene-based Baselines. To evaluate motion modeling within an explicit 4D scene representation, we compare against the framework proposed in 4DGS-Cinemagraphy [9]. This method first estimates consistent 3D motion by aligning multi-view 2D optical flow using reprojection-based optimization. The estimated motion is then used to condition a video generation model, whose synthesized videos are subsequently used as supervision to reconstruct a dynamic Gaussian scene representation. 

4.2 Evaluation Protocol 

To quantitatively evaluate the generated 4D scenes, we assess both the realism of the generated environmental dynamics and the visual quality of the rendered results. We construct a small benchmark consisting of 10 curated scenes con-taining diverse environmental dynamics, including clouds, flowing rivers, ocean waves, smoke, and fire. Because no standardized benchmark currently exists for evaluating environmental dynamics in interactive 4D world generation, we adopt GPT-4o based non-reference metrics following PhysGen3D [45]. Specifically, 

PhysReal measures the plausibility of the generated environmental dynamics, while PhotoReal evaluates the perceptual visual quality of the rendered videos. LivingWorld 11           

> Fig. 4: Qualitative comparison under camera movement. (a) Veo 3.1 [6], (b) CogVideoX [8], (c) Tora [7], and (d) Ours. Each column corresponds to the cam-era viewpoint indicated by the colored camera icons.

4.3 Implementation Details 

We employ the Eulerian flow prediction model from 3D Cinemagraphy [29] to estimate dense 2D motion fields. Motion regions are extracted from user-provided control points using the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [39]. Depth is estimated using the pretrained MoGeV2 model [46]. All models are publicly available and used without additional fine-tuning to isolate the contribution of our motion field construction and propagation framework. 

4.4 Quantitative Results 

Table 1 compares our method with recent video generation models and a 4D scene-based approach. Our method achieves the highest PhysReal and PhotoReal scores. In addition, it requires significantly less generation time, producing a complete 4D scene in 12 seconds. This includes approximately 9 seconds for scene generation and about 3 seconds for motion alignment and motion field update. In contrast, video generation models [6 –8] and the 4DGS-Cinemagraphy [9] approach require several minutes to produce comparable results. This improvement stems from explicitly modeling environmental dynamics as a global motion field, which enables coherent motion while avoiding expensive video-based optimization. These results demonstrate that our approach achieves a favorable balance between physical realism, visual quality, and efficiency. 12 H. Mun et al. 

Fig. 5: Qualitative comparison of motion consistency across different methods on the same input image. (a) Naive Scene Flow, (b) WonderWorld [5] + 3D-MOM, and (c) Ours.                     

> Method Time (s) MCA ( ↑)FMV ( ↓)PhysReal ( ↑)PhotoReal ( ↑)
> WonderWorld [5] + Naive Scene Flow 9.3 0.0550 1.91 0.66 0.61 WonderWorld [5] + 3D-MOM [9] 600.0 0.0597 1.66 0.83 0.77 Ours (full) 12.1 0.0742 0.29 0.87 0.94

Table 2: Quantitative comparison for the geometry-aware alignment module. We compare naive scene flow propagation, optimization-based alignment (3D-MOM), and our geometry-aware alignment. 

4.5 Qualitative Results 

Appendix provides additional qualitative results covering diverse environmental dynamics, including fluid-like motions such as fire, smoke, and clouds. Figure 4 presents a qualitative comparison with recent video generation models. Veo 3.1 (Fig. 4a) often fails to generate meaningful environmental dynamics, leaving regions such as clouds or water largely static despite camera motion. CogVideoX (Fig. 4b) produces visually plausible motion but does not maintain consistent 3D scene structure, leading to noticeable geometric distortions and appearance inconsistencies as the camera viewpoint changes. Tora (Fig. 4c) exhibits temporal inconsistencies in dynamic regions, which produce visible artifacts in fluid-like areas. In contrast, our method (Fig. 4d) preserves consistent scene geometry while generating coherent environmental motion, enabling stable dynamics under controlled camera trajectories. 

4.6 Ablation study 

We analyze the contribution of our key components: (1) the motion alignment module and (2) the design of the motion field, including the hash-based represen-tation and bidirectional motion integration. 

Geometry-Aware Alignment Module. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed motion alignment module, we compare three variants: (1) naive scene flow accumulation without alignment, (2) optimization-based alignment using the 3D-MOM framework from 4DGS-Cinemagraphy [9], and (3) our lightweight motion alignment module. We measure motion consistency using two metrics. Mean Cosine Alignment (MCA) measures directional coherence of the scene flow LivingWorld 13  

> Fig. 6: Ablation study on motion field design. (a) w/o hash-based motion field, (b) w/o bidirectional motion propagation, (c) Ours

by computing cosine similarity between neighboring motion vectors, while Flow Magnitude Variance (FMV) measures the local stability of motion magnitude across neighboring points. Table 2 reports runtime and motion consistency comparisons. Without align-ment, motion is directly accumulated in newly revealed regions, resulting in unstable motion directions and inconsistent magnitudes across the scene, re-flected by the lowest MCA and highest FMV. The 3D-MOM variant improves directional coherence by enforcing reprojection-based consistency across over-lapping views. However, the optimization is restricted to overlapping regions, which prevents the method from enforcing globally consistent motion when the camera explores newly generated areas. In addition, the reprojection-based it-erative optimization leads to extremely high computational cost. In contrast, our alignment module achieves the best motion consistency while maintaining efficient runtime. As shown in Table 2, our method significantly improves MCA and reduces FMV compared to both baselines while requiring only a fraction of the computation time. Figure 5 provides qualitative comparisons. The naive scene flow approach (a) produces unstable motion with exaggerated magnitude accumulation. The 3D-MOM method (b) improves local coherence in overlapping regions but fails to maintain globally consistent motion as the camera explores new areas. This limitation arises because 3D-MOM optimizes motion indepen-dently for each point using image-space supervision, which aligns motion only within overlapping views and does not enforce a global transformation across the scene. In contrast, our method (c) generates stable and coherent environmental dynamics across viewpoints, demonstrating the effectiveness of lightweight global motion alignment. 

Motion Field Design. We analyze the impact of two key components in our framework: the scene-level motion field and bidirectional motion propagation (Fig. 6). First, we evaluate a variant that directly applies the estimated 3D scene flow to Gaussians without learning a motion field (Fig. 6a). In this setting, motion is propagated through Euler integration using the same flow vector at each step. As a result, motion vectors are repeatedly accumulated over time for each Gaussian, leading to unrealistic motion magnitudes and severe temporal artifacts, particularly in regions with complex environmental dynamics. Next, we ablate bidirectional motion propagation by using only forward motion in-tegration (Fig. 6b). Although this variant produces locally smooth motion in visible regions, it fails to preserve Gaussian density in highly dynamic areas. 14 H. Mun et al.  

> Fig. 7: Integration of environmental dynamics with localized object-centric motion. Environmental dynamics (e.g., water flow) coexist with motion applied to selected regions such as flags and tree branches.

Forward-only integration causes Gaussians to gradually drift away from their original distribution, resulting in visible holes and unstable rendering near motion boundaries. In contrast, our full model (Fig. 6c) learns a compact hash-based motion field that defines motion over the global 3D space. Each Gaussian retrieves motion based on its spatial location, preventing redundant motion accumulation and improving temporal stability. Combined with bidirectional propagation, our method maintains density in dynamic regions and produces stable, artifact-free environmental dynamics. 

4.7 Integration with Object-Centric Motion 

While our primary focus is modeling environmental dynamics such as clouds, water, and other fluid-like phenomena, our framework can also incorporate lo-calized object-centric motion. To demonstrate this capability, we augment the environmental motion field with localized motion applied to selected regions, such as the fluttering of flags or the swaying of tree branches. As shown in Fig. 7, these object-centric motions integrate naturally with the generated environmental dynamics, producing visually consistent scene evolution. This example illustrates that the proposed framework can incorporate localized rigid motion while pre-serving its primary focus on large-scale environmental dynamics. In future work, the framework could be extended to support richer forms of object-centric mo-tion, including articulated objects and human motion, enabling more complex interactive dynamic worlds. 

# 5 Conclusion 

We presented a framework for interactive 4D world generation that explicitly models environmental dynamics within a reconstructed scene, enabling coherent motion propagation and efficient visual feedback during scene expansion. While our focus is environmental motion such as clouds and water, we demonstrate that the framework can also incorporate localized rigid motion, suggesting the potential to support a broader range of dynamic behaviors. Extending the framework to handle more complex object-centric motion, such as articulated objects or human motion, remains an important direction for future work, particularly in addressing challenges related to world-coordinate alignment and motion interactions. LivingWorld 15 

# References 

1. Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. ,42(4):139–1, 2023. 2. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications of the ACM , 65(1):99–106, 2021. 3. Jason Baldridge, Jakob Bauer, Mukul Bhutani, Nicole Brichtova, Andrew Bunner, Lluis Castrejon, Kelvin Chan, Yichang Chen, Sander Dieleman, Yuqing Du, et al. Imagen 3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07009 , 2024. 4. Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianxiao Yang, et al. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 , 2025. 5. Hong-Xing Yu, Haoyi Duan, Charles Herrmann, William T Freeman, and Jiajun Wu. Wonderworld: Interactive 3d scene generation from a single image. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 5916–5926, 2025. 6. Thaddäus Wiedemer, Yuxuan Li, Paul Vicol, Shixiang Shane Gu, Nick Matarese, Kevin Swersky, Been Kim, Priyank Jaini, and Robert Geirhos. Video models are zero-shot learners and reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.20328 , 2025. 7. Zhenghao Zhang, Junchao Liao, Menghao Li, Zuozhuo Dai, Bingxue Qiu, Siyu Zhu, Long Qin, and Weizhi Wang. Tora: Trajectory-oriented diffusion transformer for video generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 2063–2073, 2025. 8. Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 , 2024. 9. In-Hwan Jin, Haesoo Choo, Seong-Hun Jeong, Park Heemoon, Junghwan Kim, Oh-joon Kwon, and Kyeongbo Kong. Optimizing 4d gaussians for dynamic scene video from single landscape images. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 10. Aleksander Holynski, Brian L Curless, Steven M Seitz, and Richard Szeliski. An-imating pictures with eulerian motion fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5810–5819, 2021. 11. Aniruddha Mahapatra, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Text-guided synthesis of eulerian cinemagraphs. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(6):1–13, 2023. 12. Jongwoo Choi, Kwanggyoon Seo, Amirsaman Ashtari, and Junyong Noh. Stylecine-gan: Landscape cinemagraph generation using a pre-trained stylegan. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7872–7881, 2024. 13. Biliana Kaneva, Josef Sivic, Antonio Torralba, Shai Avidan, and William T Free-man. Infinite images: Creating and exploring a large photorealistic virtual space. 

Proceedings of the IEEE , 98(8):1391–1407, 2010. 14. Andrew Liu, Richard Tucker, Varun Jampani, Ameesh Makadia, Noah Snavely, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Infinite nature: Perpetual view generation of natural scenes from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 14458–14467, 2021. 16 H. Mun et al. 15. Zhennan Wu, Yang Li, Han Yan, Taizhang Shang, Weixuan Sun, Senbo Wang, Ruikai Cui, Weizhe Liu, Hiroyuki Sato, Hongdong Li, et al. Blockfusion: Expandable 3d scene generation using latent tri-plane extrapolation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) , 43(4):1–17, 2024. 16. Tongyan Hua, Lutao Jiang, Ying-Cong Chen, and Wufan Zhao. Sat2city: 3d city generation from a single satellite image with cascaded latent diffusion. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 27978–27988, 2025. 17. Mengqi Zhou, Yuxi Wang, Jun Hou, Shougao Zhang, Yiwei Li, Chuanchen Luo, Junran Peng, and Zhaoxiang Zhang. Scenex: Procedural controllable large-scale scene generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 39, pages 10806–10814, 2025. 18. Lukas Höllein, Ang Cao, Andrew Owens, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. Text2room: Extracting textured 3d meshes from 2d text-to-image models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 7909–7920, 2023. 19. Jaeyoung Chung, Suyoung Lee, Hyeongjin Nam, Jaerin Lee, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Luciddreamer: Domain-free generation of 3d gaussian splatting scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13384 , 2023. 20. Hao Ouyang, Kathryn Heal, Stephen Lombardi, and Tiancheng Sun. Text2immersion: Generative immersive scene with 3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09242 , 2023. 21. Hong-Xing Yu, Haoyi Duan, Junhwa Hur, Kyle Sargent, Michael Rubinstein, William T Freeman, Forrester Cole, Deqing Sun, Noah Snavely, Jiajun Wu, et al. Wonderjourney: Going from anywhere to everywhere. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6658– 6667, 2024. 22. Yung-Yu Chuang, Dan B Goldman, Ke Colin Zheng, Brian Curless, David H Salesin, and Richard Szeliski. Animating pictures with stochastic motion textures. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Papers , pages 853–860. 2005. 23. Wei-Cih Jhou and Wen-Huang Cheng. Animating still landscape photographs through cloud motion creation. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , 18(1):4–13, 2015. 24. Yuki Endo, Yoshihiro Kanamori, and Shigeru Kuriyama. Animating landscape: self-supervised learning of decoupled motion and appearance for single-image video synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07192 , 2019. 25. Elizaveta Logacheva, Roman Suvorov, Oleg Khomenko, Anton Mashikhin, and Victor Lempitsky. Deeplandscape: Adversarial modeling of landscape videos. In 

European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 256–272. Springer, 2020. 26. Xiaoyu Shi, Zhaoyang Huang, Fu-Yun Wang, Weikang Bian, Dasong Li, Yi Zhang, Manyuan Zhang, Ka Chun Cheung, Simon See, Hongwei Qin, et al. Motion-i2v: Consistent and controllable image-to-video generation with explicit motion modeling. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , pages 1–11, 2024. 27. Jinbo Xing, Long Mai, Cusuh Ham, Jiahui Huang, Aniruddha Mahapatra, Chi-Wing Fu, Tien-Tsin Wong, and Feng Liu. Motioncanvas: Cinematic shot design with controllable image-to-video generation. In Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers ,pages 1–11, 2025. 28. Shuwei Shi, Biao Gong, Xi Chen, Dandan Zheng, Shuai Tan, Zizheng Yang, Yuyuan Li, Jingwen He, Kecheng Zheng, Jingdong Chen, et al. Motionstone: Decoupled LivingWorld 17 motion intensity modulation with diffusion transformer for image-to-video genera-tion. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 22864–22874, 2025. 29. Xingyi Li, Zhiguo Cao, Huiqiang Sun, Jianming Zhang, Ke Xian, and Guosheng Lin. 3d cinemagraphy from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4595–4605, 2023. 30. Liao Shen, Xingyi Li, Huiqiang Sun, Juewen Peng, Ke Xian, Zhiguo Cao, and Guosheng Lin. Make-it-4d: Synthesizing a consistent long-term dynamic scene video from a single image. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 8167–8175, 2023. 31. Uriel Singer, Shelly Sheynin, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Iurii Makarov, Filippos Kokkinos, Naman Goyal, Andrea Vedaldi, Devi Parikh, Justin Johnson, et al. Text-to-4d dynamic scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11280 , 2023. 32. Sherwin Bahmani, Ivan Skorokhodov, Victor Rong, Gordon Wetzstein, Leonidas Guibas, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, Jeong Joon Park, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and David B Lindell. 4d-fy: Text-to-4d generation using hybrid score distillation sampling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7996–8006, 2024. 33. Yufeng Zheng, Xueting Li, Koki Nagano, Sifei Liu, Otmar Hilliges, and Shalini De Mello. A unified approach for text- and image-guided 4d scene generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7300–7309, 2024. 34. Sherwin Bahmani, Xian Liu, Wang Yifan, Ivan Skorokhodov, Victor Rong, Ziwei Liu, Xihui Liu, Jeong Joon Park, Sergey Tulyakov, Gordon Wetzstein, et al. Tc4d: Trajectory-conditioned text-to-4d generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 53–72. Springer, 2024. 35. Bohan Zeng, Ling Yang, Siyu Li, Jiaming Liu, Zixiang Zhang, Juanxi Tian, Kaixin Zhu, Yongzhen Guo, Fu-Yun Wang, Minkai Xu, et al. Trans4d: Realistic geometry-aware transition for compositional text-to-4d synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07155 , 2024. 36. Rundi Wu, Ruiqi Gao, Ben Poole, Alex Trevithick, Changxi Zheng, Jonathan T. Barron, and Aleksander Holynski. Cat4d: Create anything in 4d with multi-view video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 26057–26068, 2025. 37. Zizhang Li, Hong-Xing Yu, Wei Liu, Yin Yang, Charles Herrmann, Gordon Wet-zstein, and Jiajun Wu. Wonderplay: Dynamic 3d scene generation from a single image and actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18151 , 2025. 38. Jiahao Zhan, Zizhang Li, Hong-Xing Yu, and Jiajun Wu. Perpetualwonder: Long-horizon action-conditioned 4d scene generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04876 ,2026. 39. Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 4015–4026, 2023. 40. Wolfgang Kabsch. A solution for the best rotation to relate two sets of vectors. 

Foundations of Crystallography , 32(5):922–923, 1976. 41. Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang. 4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 20310–20320, 2024. 18 H. Mun et al. 42. Jeongmin Bae, Seoha Kim, Youngsik Yun, Hahyun Lee, Gun Bang, and Youngjung Uh. Per-gaussian embedding-based deformation for deformable 3d gaussian splatting. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 321–335. Springer, 2024. 43. Zhan Li, Zhang Chen, Zhong Li, and Yi Xu. Spacetime gaussian feature splatting for real-time dynamic view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8508–8520, 2024. 44. Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG) , 41(4):1–15, 2022. 45. Boyuan Chen, Hanxiao Jiang, Shaowei Liu, Saurabh Gupta, Yunzhu Li, Hao Zhao, and Shenlong Wang. Physgen3d: Crafting a miniature interactive world from a single image. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 6178–6189, 2025. 46. Ruicheng Wang, Sicheng Xu, Yue Dong, Yu Deng, Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Guangzhong Sun, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Moge-2: Accurate monocular geometry with metric scale and sharp details. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02546 ,2025. LivingWorld 19 

# Organization of the Supplementary 

This supplementary material provides additional technical details, evaluation metrics, runtime analysis, and experimental results that support the main paper. 

– A. Algorithmic Formulation 

• A.1 LivingWorld Interactive Pipeline 

– B. Implementation Details 

• B.1 Reprojection-based Correspondence Construction 

• B.2 Alignment Initialization and Refinement 

• B.3 Hash-based Motion Field 

– C. Motion Consistency Metrics 

• C.1 Mean Cosine Alignment (MCA) 

• C.2 Flow Magnitude Variance (FMV) 

– D. Additional Experimental Results 

• D.1 Additional Quantitative Evaluation on In-the-Wild Dataset 

• D.2 Runtime Analysis 

• D.3 Human Perceptual Study 

• D.4 Additional Qualitative Results 

# A Algorithms 

A.1 LivingWorld Interactive Pipeline 

For clarity, we present the overall control loop of LivingWorld in Algorithm 1. The algorithm summarizes the interactive pipeline for constructing and updating environmental dynamics, including scene expansion, motion alignment, motion field construction, and bidirectional motion propagation. 

# B Implementation Details 

B.1 Reprojection-based Correspondence Construction 

To align newly predicted scene flow samples with previously accumulated motion estimations, we establish spatial correspondences using a reprojection-based matching strategy. Let π(·) denote the camera projection function that maps a 3D point to image coordinates. Let a and b index individual scene-flow samples in the current and previously accumulated sets, respectively. Given the 3D positions associated with the current scene flow Si and the previously accumulated flows Sprev , we project both point sets into the current camera view: 

(u(a)cur , v (a)cur ) = round 



π(x(a)cur )



, (u(b)prev , v (b)prev ) = round 



π(x(b)prev )



.20 H. Mun et al. 

Algorithm 1 LivingWorld interactive pipeline for constructing environmental dynamics 

Input: Initial image I0, motion seeds {pi, h i}

Output: Scene representation (G, F θ )

1: G ← InitScene( I0)

2: Sprev ← ∅ 

3: Fθ ← InitMotionField() 

4: in parallel do Thread 1: real-time rendering 5: while running do 

6: Irend ← Render( G, F θ , t ) ▷ Includes trajectory propagation and opacity 7: end while 

8: end parallel 

9: in parallel do Thread 2: environmental dynamics update 10: while interactive update do 

11: (G, I new , D new ) ← SceneExpansion( G)

12: M ← SAM( Inew , {pi}) ▷ Seed-guided motion masks 13: F2D ← EulerianFlow( Inew , M, {hi}) ▷ Direction-guided motion prediction 14: Si ← Lift2Dto3D( F2D , D new )

15: if Sprev ̸ = ∅ then 

16: (Smi , S m

> prev

) ← ReprojectionMatch( Si, S prev )

17: (R, s ) ← KabschAlign( Smi , S m

> prev

)

18: (R, s ) ← RefineAlignment( R, s, S mi , S m

> prev

)

19: Snew ← SelectUnmatched( Si, S mi )

20: Snew ← ApplyTransform( Snew , R, s )

21: else 

22: Snew ← Si

23: end if 

24: Sprev ← Sprev ∪ Snew 

25: Fθ ← TrainHashMotionField( Fθ , S prev )

26: end while 

27: end parallel 

Here, x(a)cur and x(b)prev denote the 3D positions associated with the a-th and b-th scene-flow samples in the current and previously accumulated sets, respectively. Pixel coordinates are discretized using rounding to match the implementation. Correspondences are obtained by identifying samples that share the same pixel location in the image plane: 

M =

n

(a, b ) (u(a)cur , v (a)cur ) = ( u(b)prev , v (b)prev )

o

.

The matched scene flow subsets are therefore defined as 

Smi = {S(a) 

> i

| (a, b ) ∈ M} , Sm 

> prev

= {S(b)prev | (a, b ) ∈ M} .

These matched flow pairs are subsequently used for estimating the alignment transformation between the two motion fields. If reliable correspondences are not available due to limited view overlap, the newly observed scene-flow samples are directly integrated into the accumulated set without performing alignment. LivingWorld 21 

B.2 Alignment Initialization and Refinement 

Given the matched scene-flow subsets Smi and Sm 

> prev

obtained from the correspon-dence set M, we estimate a global similarity transform that aligns the motion vectors of the current view with the previously accumulated scene flow. The alignment consists of a rotation R ∈ SO (3) and a uniform scale s. We formulate the alignment as the following least-squares problem: 

arg min 

> R,s

X

> (a,b )∈M

S(b)prev − sRS (a)

> i
> 2

.

Alignment initialization. We first compute an initial estimate of the rotation using the Kabsch algorithm [40], which provides the optimal rotation matrix that minimizes the squared error between the two matched flow sets in a closed-form manner. The scale parameter is initialized using a least-squares estimate based on the magnitudes of the matched motion vectors. This initialization provides a fast and stable estimate of the global motion transformation. 

Alignment refinement. To further reduce residual discrepancies caused by noisy flow predictions and depth estimation errors, we perform a lightweight gradient-based refinement step. The rotation is parameterized using an axis– angle representation, which allows the rotation matrix R to be updated through standard gradient optimization. Starting from the initialized (R, s ), we minimize the same alignment objective using stochastic gradient descent (SGD). In our implementation, the optimization is performed for 300 iterations with a learning rate of 1×10 −1. Since the refinement operates only on the sparse matched flow samples, the computational overhead is negligible while improving the stability and accuracy of the alignment. 

B.3 Hash-based Motion Field 

To represent spatially continuous environmental dynamics, we learn a neural motion field Fθ : R3 → R3 that maps a 3D position to a motion vector. The motion field is trained using the union of the previously accumulated scene-flow samples Sprev and the newly estimated flows at the current step. This training strategy ensures that the learned motion field remains consistent with both previously observed motion and newly incorporated scene-flow samples, preventing drift during incremental scene expansion. To efficiently model spatial variations in the motion field, we adopt a multi-resolution hash-grid encoding similar to Instant-NGP [44]. Each input position 

x is first normalized according to the spatial extent of the observed scene. The normalization parameters are computed from the bounding box of the accumulated 3D points associated with the scene-flow samples Sprev . Specifically, we estimate the center c and half-extent b of the point set and normalize positions as 

˜x = x − cb .22 H. Mun et al. 

The normalized coordinates are then mapped to [0 , 1] 3 before being passed to the hash-grid encoder. The encoder consists of 16 resolution levels with 4 features per level and a hash map size of 219 . The base grid resolution is set to 16 and grows geometrically with a scale factor of 1.5 across levels. 

Motion prediction network. The encoded features are processed by a lightweight multi-layer perceptron that predicts the 3D motion vector at each spatial location: 

Fθ (x) = MLP (Enc (˜ x)) .

The network outputs a 3-dimensional motion vector representing the local velocity at position x.

Training objective. The motion field is trained to regress the accumulated scene-flow samples by minimizing a mean-squared error loss: 

Lmotion = X

> i

∥Fθ (xi) − si∥2 ,

where xi and si denote the position and corresponding scene-flow vector of the 

i-th sample in Sprev .

Optimization details. The network is trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10 −2 for 100 iterations. In practice, the lightweight network converges quickly, and no extensive optimization is required. Because the number of scene-flow samples is moderate and the network is lightweight, the training process typically converges within a few seconds and does not affect the interactive performance of the system. 

# C Motion Consistency Metrics 

To quantitatively evaluate motion consistency in the ablation study of the Geometry-Aware Alignment Module, we use two metrics: Mean Cosine Alignment (MCA) and Flow Magnitude Variance (FMV). Both metrics are computed on the set of accumulated 3D scene flow vectors {sp}Np=1 and their corresponding 3D positions. These metrics measure the local directional agreement and magnitude smoothness of neighboring motion vectors, providing a quantitative estimate of spatial motion coherence in the reconstructed dynamic scene. 

C.1 Mean Cosine Alignment (MCA) 

Mean Cosine Alignment measures the directional consistency of neighboring mo-tion vectors. For each scene-flow sample sp, we compute the K-nearest neighbors 

N (p) based on Euclidean distance in 3D space, where K denotes the number of neighbors. The flow vectors are first normalized as 

ˆsp = sp

∥sp∥ .

MCA is defined as the average cosine similarity between each flow direction and those of its spatial neighbors: LivingWorld 23                     

> Category Method PhysReal ( ↑)PhotoReal ( ↑)Time (s)
> Video Gen. Veo 3.1 [6] 0.80 0.82 140 CogVideoX [8] 0.75 0.79 1404 Tora [7] 0.79 0.82 546 4D Scene 4DGS-Cinemagraphy [9] 0.81 0.80 2100
> LivingWorld (Ours) 0.82 0.83 12

Table 3: Quantitative evaluation on additional in-the-wild dataset collected from publicly available images. PhysReal and PhotoReal are GPT-4o based metrics that measure the physical plausibility and visual realism of the generated dynamic scenes. 

MCA = 1

N

> N

X

> p=1

 1

K

X 

> j∈N (p)

ˆsp · ˆsj

 .

A higher MCA indicates stronger directional coherence among neighboring motion vectors, reflecting more consistent motion propagation in the reconstructed scene. 

C.2 Flow Magnitude Variance (FMV) 

Flow Magnitude Variance measures the local smoothness of motion magnitudes across neighboring points. Let mp = ∥sp∥ denote the magnitude of the scene flow at point p. Using the same neighborhood structure N (p), FMV is defined as 

FMV = 1

N

> N

X

> p=1

 1

K

X 

> j∈N (p)

(mp − mj )2

 .

A lower FMV indicates smoother variations in motion magnitude across neigh-boring regions, corresponding to more stable motion strength in the estimated scene flow. 

# D Additional Experiment Results 

D.1 Additional Quantitative Evaluation on In-the-Wild Dataset 

To further evaluate the generalization of the proposed method beyond the curated scenes used in the main paper, we conduct additional quantitative experiments on an additional in-the-wild dataset collected from publicly available images. These scenes contain diverse natural environments and provide a complementary evaluation setting for dynamic scene generation. We follow the same evaluation protocol used in the main paper and compute the GPT-4o based metrics, PhysReal and PhotoReal, which measure physical plausibility and visual realism of the generated dynamic scenes. Table 3 reports the results on these additional in-the-wild scenes. The proposed framework achieves consistently strong performance across both metrics, demonstrating robust motion generation across diverse natural scenes. 24 H. Mun et al. 

D.2 Runtime Analysis 

We report the runtime of the main components of the proposed pipeline to provide a clearer understanding of the computational cost of interactive 4D scene generation. All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 5090 GPU. During interactive exploration, the system maintains two parallel processes: (1) real-time rendering of the current dynamic scene, and (2) incremental scene expansion and motion update. Table 4 summarizes the runtime of the major modules in the update pipeline. The motion update stage in the main paper corresponds to the combined cost of motion estimation, geometry-aware alignment, and hash-field update, which together take approximately 3 seconds.         

> Module Runtime (s) Scene expansion (outpainting + depth) 9.0 Motion estimation (Eulerian flow) 0.2 Motion alignment (Kabsch + refinement) 0.3 Motion field update (hash-grid training) 2.5 Total update time ≈12.0
> Table 4: Runtime breakdown of the main modules in the proposed pipeline.

D.3 Human Perceptual Study 

To further evaluate the perceptual quality of the generated dynamic scenes, we conduct a human perceptual study using a two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) protocol. A total of 170 participants took part in the study. Each participant evaluated 10 scenes. For each scene, participants were shown a side-by-side comparison of two videos generated from the same input image: one produced by our method and one produced by a baseline method. The order of the videos was randomized to avoid bias. The evaluation scenes were sampled from both the curated dataset used in the main paper and additional in-the-wild dataset, allowing us to assess perceptual realism across a broader set of environments. Participants were asked to select the video that performs better according to two criteria: (1) physical plausibility, which evaluates whether the motion behaves in a physically reasonable manner, and (2) motion realism, which measures the visual naturalness of the generated motion. Table 5 shows the preference ratio of our method over the baseline across all evaluations. Our method is preferred by the majority of participants under both evaluation criteria, providing additional human validation of motion realism beyond the GPT-4o based evaluation used in the main paper. 

D.4 Additional Qualitative Results 

Figs. 8 and 9 present additional qualitative examples, including scenes sampled from both the curated dataset used in the main paper and additional in-the-wild dataset. These examples exhibit diverse environmental dynamics such as LivingWorld 25 Physics Plausibility ↑ Motion Fidelity ↑        

> over Veo 3.1 [6] 72% 72% over CogVideoX [8] 78% 73% over Tora [7] 75% 80%
> Table 5: 2AFC human study results showing the preference rate of LivingWorld
> over baseline methods. Participants were asked to select the video with more plausible physics and more realistic motion.

clouds, smoke, and fire. The results demonstrate that the proposed framework can generate spatially coherent motion across a wide range of environments beyond those shown in the main paper. Fig. 10 illustrates a case where motion is applied to a rigid object. Since our framework models dynamics as a continuous spatial velocity field primarily designed for environmental motion, minor geometric distortions may appear in strictly rigid-body motion. 26 H. Mun et al. 

Fig. 8: Additional qualitative results on curated scenes. LivingWorld 27 

Fig. 9: Additional qualitative results on in-the-wild scenes. 28 H. Mun et al. 

Fig. 10: Rigid-body motion is outside the primary scope of our framework. 

Applying motion to rigid objects may introduce geometric distortions, since the proposed method models dynamics as continuous spatial velocity fields designed primarily for environmental dynamics.