Title: 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05876v3

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 01:23:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering 

# MAE YOUNES, INRIA, University of Rennes, France 

# ADNANE BOUKHAYMA, INRIA, University of Rennes, France Inverse Rendering via Surfel Optimization 

> Joint recovery of shape, materials, and lighting from multi-view images

Surface Splatting of Mesh-Sampled Surfels   

> Mesh converted to oriented point samples and rendered through 3DSS Oriented Surfel Set Normals PBR with IBL Shading

Fig. 1. 3D Surface Splatting (3DSS) is a differentiable surface splatting renderer for physically-based inverse rendering. Left: 3DSS jointly recovers geometry, materials, and illumination by optimizing an unstructured set of surfel primitives through differentiable rendering. Right: The same renderer handles surfel sets obtained by point-sampling existing triangle meshes, producing anti-aliased, physically-based images. 

We present 3D Surface Splatting (3DSS), the first differentiable surface splat-ting renderer for physically-based inverse rendering from multi-view images. Our central insight is that the surface separation problem at the heart of surface splatting admits a direct formulation in terms of the reconstruction kernels themselves. From this foundation we derive a coverage-based com-positing model whose per-layer opacity arises directly from the accumulated Elliptical Weighted Average reconstruction weight, yielding anti-aliased silhouettes and informative visibility gradients at sparsely covered edges. Combined with forward microfacet shading under co-optimized HDR en-vironment lighting and density-aware adaptive refinement, 3DSS jointly recovers shape, spatially-varying BRDF materials, and illumination. Because the optimized representation is a set of oriented surface samples, it bridges natively to mesh-based workflows via surface reconstruction from oriented point cloud methods. We evaluate 3DSS against mesh-based, implicit, and Gaussian-splatting baselines across geometry reconstruction, novel-view synthesis, and novel-illumination relighting. 

1 Introduction 

The promise of inverse rendering—reconstructing geometry, ma-terials, and illumination from photographs as editable, relightable assets—rests on a renderer whose image formation is differentiable end-to-end, including through the visibility function. Today’s differ-entiable rendering landscape is dominated by two paradigms with complementary strengths and weaknesses. Triangle-mesh rasterizers [Laine et al . 2020] produce sharp im-ages with explicit surface geometry and, when coupled with a dif-ferentiable volumetric shape extraction such as DMTet [Shen et al .2021], have been demonstrated for joint recovery of shape, materials, and lighting from multi-view photographs [Munkberg et al . 2022]. However, triangle mesh gradient-based optimization faces several challenges: careful regularization is required to suppress degenerate elements, self-intersections, and broken manifolds as the topology evolves, and increasing the grid resolution to capture finer detail amplifies these failure modes. 

> Authors’ Contact Information: Mae Younes, mae.younes.work@pm.me, INRIA, Univer-sity of Rennes, France; Adnane Boukhayma, INRIA, University of Rennes, France.

Volume-based renderers built on neural fields [Mildenhall et al .2021; Wang et al . 2021] or 3D Gaussians [Kerbl et al . 2023] side-step connectivity altogether and have set a new bar for novel-view synthesis, but their image formation composites radiance along the ray rather than at the surface . Extended to inverse rendering, this volumetric blending mixes per-primitive material attributes, including normals, into pixel values that no longer correspond to the reflectance of any single physical surface, undermining the very decomposition the application requires. A third paradigm has been curiously absent from this landscape: 

surface splatting [Zwicker et al . 2001]. In its Elliptical Weighted Average (EWA) formulation, an unstructured set of oriented surfels (surface elements), each carrying a Gaussian reconstruction kernel in its local tangent plane, reconstructs a continuous, band-limited surface signal through normalized accumulation of overlapping ker-nels [Shepard 1968]. Surface splatting combines the connectivity-free flexibility of point-based methods with the explicit surface semantics of mesh rasterization: each primitive is an opaque surface sample with a well-defined tangent frame, and geometry, normals, and band-limited filtering are all encoded in the same surfel repre-sentation; without texture parameterization, manifold guarantees, or mesh repair as the optimization reshapes the scene. Why has surface splatting not been brought into the differen-tiable rendering domain? The obstacle is the very property that distinguishes it from triangle rasterization: a surface in EWA splat-ting is not represented by any single primitive but emerges from the associative overlap of neighboring kernel supports. Visibility therefore cannot be localized to an individual surfel the way it can at a triangle edge. Classical surface splatting methods [Weyrich et al .2007; Zwicker et al . 2001] addressed this by reconstructing only the 

frontmost surface per pixel through ternary depth tests against a stored reference depth—a hard, discontinuous decision incompatible with gradient-based optimization, and one that already precludes correct anti-aliasing across overlapping surfaces in forward render-ing. The pioneering Differentiable Surface Splatting (DSS) of Yifan et al. [2019] confronted the visibility discontinuity at the level of   

> arXiv:2605.05876v3 [cs.GR] 13 May 2026 2•Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma

individual primitives, approximating the gradient of a binary visi-bility flag through hypothetical visibility toggles, but inherited the single-layer reconstruction regime and the screen-space affine ap-proximation of the original EWA derivation, and was not designed for physically-based inverse rendering with material and lighting decomposition. We present 3D Surface Splatting (3DSS), the first differentiable surface splatting renderer designed for physically-based inverse rendering, jointly recovering geometry, materials, and illumination from multi-view images. Our central insight is that the surface separation problem at the heart of surface splatting—deciding which primitives belong to the same continuous surface at a pixel, admits a direct formulation in terms of the reconstruction kernels themselves. Building on this, we derive a smooth, per-layer coverage opacity directly from the accumulated EWA weight; the same quantity that drives signal reconstruction, and composite layers front-to-back via the over operator [Porter and Duff 1984]. The resulting renderer is surface-based by construction, anti-aliased at silhouettes, and continuously differentiable through visibility. Our method departs from prior splatting work in the following key contributions: 

• A multi-layer surface separation algorithm formulated as interval merging over the sorted primitive stream, replacing the binary/ternary depth tests of prior surface splatters and supporting an arbitrary number of surface layers per pixel in a single rasterization pass (section 3.2). 

• A coverage-based differentiable compositing model in which per-layer opacity arises from the accumulated EWA reconstruction weight, yielding anti-aliased silhouettes and informative gradients at sparsely covered edges that single-layer formulations cannot deliver (section 3.5). 

• An efficient object-space MIP filter that exploits the re-sampling structure of surface splatting to suppress sampling aliasing. We introduce a center-precomputed approxima-tion that amortizes the per-pixel evaluation with negligible visual loss in filtering quality (section 3.3). Because the optimized representation is a set of oriented sur-face samples, it is natively compatible with established mesh recon-struction algorithms such as Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruc-tion [Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013], providing a direct bridge between point-based inverse rendering and downstream mesh-based work-flows. We evaluate 3DSS on the Stanford-ORB benchmark [Kuang et al .2023], comparing against mesh-based, implicit, and Gaussian-splatting baselines on geometry reconstruction, novel-view synthesis, and novel-illumination relighting. Moreover, we validate the design choices in optimization and the rendering components of our method through quantitative and visual ablative analysis. 

2 Related Work 2.1 EWA Surface Splatting 

The use of points as rendering primitives was first suggested by Levoy and Whitted [1985]. Surface splatting [Zwicker et al . 2001] brought high-quality texture filtering to point-based rendering by adapting the Elliptical Weighted Average (EWA) resampling fil-ter [Greene and Heckbert 2007; Heckbert 1989] to irregularly spaced point samples: each surfel carries a Gaussian reconstruction kernel in its local tangent plane, whose projection onto the image plane is convolved with a screen-space prefilter to yield a combined re-sampling kernel that simultaneously reconstructs the continuous surface signal and band-limits it to the pixel grid. Because samples are irregular, the accumulated kernel contributions do not form a partition of unity; Shepard normalization [Shepard 1968] com-pensates by dividing by the total weight. Transparency and edge anti-aliasing were handled through a modified A-buffer [Carpenter 1984] that stores multiple fragments per pixel and composites them after all splats have been emitted. A persistent challenge in surface splatting is surface separation :distinguishing surfels on the same continuous surface from those on a different, co-projected one. Zwicker et al. [2001] employ a fixed depth threshold 𝜀 to decide whether a fragment should be blended into the running EWA sum or treated as a distinct surface; a ternary test commonly referred to as extended z-buffering [Krivanek 2003]. Levoy and Whitted [1985] and Räsänen [2002] proposed per-splat depth ranges that adaptively merge overlapping fragments, improving robustness at silhouettes. Weyrich et al. [2007] designed a hardware architecture for EWA splatting that parameterizes the ternary depth test by each surfel’s depth extent and introduced an efficient object-space ray–surfel intersection via the T-matrix mapping formulation, avoiding the numerical instabilities of screen-space conic representations [Zwicker et al . 2004]. Their T-matrix construction provides the geometric foundation for our rasterizer. However, most of these methods are fundamentally single-layer :only the frontmost surface is reconstructed per pixel, precluding cor-rect edge anti-aliasing at visibility discontinuities and introducing hard rendering discontinuities that are unsuitable for gradient-based optimization. Our method extends this depth-range concept to a 

multi-layer algorithm that partitions the sorted primitive sequence into an arbitrary number of surface groups in a single rasterization pass (section 3.2). 

2.2 Differentiable Mesh Rasterization 

The central challenge of differentiable rendering is to produce useful gradients through the discontinuous visibility function at surface boundaries. SoftRasterizer [Liu et al . 2019] replaces hard triangle coverage with a probabilistic formulation that blurs primitive bound-aries, making the rendering function smooth at the cost of image fidelity and tunable blur parameters. DIB-R [Chen et al . 2019] pro-duces a separate soft alpha channel derived from the distance to triangle edges, but silhouettes in front of other geometry receive no visibility gradients, limiting the method to single-object settings. 

nvdiffrast [Laine et al . 2020] preserves a crisp forward image and provides visibility gradients through an analytic post-process antialiasing pass that blends axis-aligned pixel pairs across detected silhouette edges. While highly performant and widely adopted, this approach requires triangle connectivity and clip-space vertex po-sitions, restricts gradient flow to axis-aligned pixel pairs, and can miss edges when tessellation is fine relative to pixel size. 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 3

In the physically-based rendering setting, differentiable path trac-ers [Bangaru et al . 2020; Li et al . 2018; Loubet et al . 2019; Nimier-David et al . 2019] handle visibility discontinuities through Monte Carlo edge sampling, reparameterization of the integration domain, or warp fields, providing the most principled treatment of visibil-ity gradients with support for global illumination. However, their reliance on stochastic sampling incurs rendering times orders of magnitude slower than rasterization, making them impractical for the intensive iterative optimization typical of inverse rendering. 

nvdiffrast has been demonstrated as a backbone for inverse rendering in NVDiffRec [Munkberg et al . 2022], which combines it with DMTet [Shen et al . 2021], a deformable tetrahedral grid that extracts a mesh through differentiable marching tetrahedra, and split-sum IBL [Karis and Games 2013] to jointly recover shape, BRDF parameters, and lighting from multi-view images. While ef-fective, mesh-based representations introduce practical challenges beyond fixed topology. Increasing the resolution of the underlying tetrahedral grid to capture finer geometric detail leads to a rapidly growing number of vertex degrees of freedom, and the resulting optimization becomes increasingly prone to degenerate triangles, self-intersections, and broken connectivity, requiring careful tuning of Laplacian and other geometric regularizers. 

2.3 Neural Volume Rendering 

Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [Mildenhall et al . 2021] represents scenes as continuous volumetric radiance fields parameterized by MLPs, queried along camera rays and composited via volume ren-dering. Subsequent work has improved geometric fidelity via signed distance functions [Wang et al . 2021; Yariv et al . 2021, 2020], and anti-aliasing [Barron et al. 2021, 2022]. Several methods extend neural volume rendering for physically-based inverse rendering by decomposing the radiance field into reflectance components, employing strategies ranging from distilled NeRFs with explicit material decomposition [Zhang et al . 2021b] to SDF-based representations with indirect illumination [Boss et al .2021; Liu et al . 2023; Wu et al . 2023], factored tensor fields [Jin et al .2023], and spherical Gaussian scene models [Zhang et al . 2021a]. Most of these methods inherit the computational cost of volumetric ray-marching, and because the underlying model is volumetric, face fundamental challenges in recovering physically meaningful surface-level BRDF decompositions, as the alpha-blended material values at a pixel do not correspond to a well-defined surface with those material properties. Our method inherently avoids these issues: surfels are surface samples and BRDF evaluation at each sample is physically meaningful. 

2.4 Differentiable Volume Splatting 

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [Kerbl et al . 2023] represents scenes as anisotropic 3D Gaussians with per-primitive learnable opacity, rendered via differentiable alpha compositing sorted by center depth. Its combination of real-time performance and high novel view syn-thesis quality has led to rapid adoption. 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS) [Huang et al . 2024] collapses the 3D volumetric primitive into oriented planar disks, geometrically equivalent to surfels, and employs perspective-correct ray–splat intersection in the same object-space formulation used by Weyrich et al. [2007]. Despite this geometric similarity to surface elements, 2DGS retains the volumetric rendering model. The surface interpre-tation is imposed post hoc through depth distortion [Barron et al .2022] and normal consistency regularizers that encourage primi-tives to concentrate near a single surface, but these priors operate within a volume rendering framework that does not inherently dis-tinguish surfaces. Our method shares the planar-disk geometry and object-space intersection of 2DGS but departs fundamentally in the rendering model: surfels carry no learnable opacity, pixel cover-age arises from the collective EWA reconstruction weight within each depth-separated surface layer, and compositing is performed across layers via the over operator [Porter and Duff 1984] applied to coverage-derived opacity; a surface rendering model rather than a volumetric one. 

Anti-aliasing. Mip-Splatting [Yu et al . 2024a] addresses aliasing in 3DGS via a screen-space MIP prefilter applied after screen-space reconstruction. AA-2DGS [Younes and Boukhayma 2025a] formu-lates an object-space MIP filter in the tangent frame of the 2D splat by mapping the pixel prefilter into the local coordinate system via the Jacobian of the ray–splat intersection. We adopt the object-space MIP formulation of AA-2DGS with a center-precomputed approximation that amortizes the Jacobian evaluation (section 3.3). 

Physically-based Gaussian splatting. Several methods [Gao et al .2024; Jiang et al . 2024; Liang et al . 2024a; Shi et al . 2025; Yao et al .2024; Ye et al . 2024a; Younes and Boukhayma 2025b; Zhou et al .2025] extend 3DGS for inverse rendering by attaching PBR material attributes to Gaussian primitives. These methods composite material attributes—including normals—through volumetric alpha blending, which is problematic for unit-length directional quantities such as normals. Our forward shading paradigm evaluates the shading function at the sample level before any blending occurs, which integrates naturally with the multi-layer compositing architecture and avoids the need to store per-layer G-buffers for deferred shading. 

2.5 Prior Differentiable Surface Splatting 

The closest prior work to ours in terms of representation is Dif-ferentiable Surface Splatting (DSS) by Yifan et al. [2019], which first introduced differentiable rendering for oriented point clouds within the EWA splatting framework of Zwicker et al. [2001]. DSS demonstrated that point-based representations can be optimized via gradient descent for geometry processing tasks such as shape fitting and denoising. DSS addresses the rendering discontinuity at the level of indi-vidual primitives: the visibility function is factored into a smooth Gaussian weight and a discontinuous binary indicator that encodes whether a surfel is visible at a given pixel. It constructs an ap-proximate linear visibility gradient by hypothetically toggling each surfel’s visibility and evaluating the resulting pixel intensity change, which requires caching storage and re-evaluations per pixel during backpropagation. Our method departs from DSS in two aspects: we address the visibility discontinuity at the level of reconstructed surface layers 

(section 3.5.1), and target physically-based inverse rendering with 4 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma 

forward shading of microfacet BRDFs and co-optimized environ-ment lighting (section 3.4) given input color images. 

3 3D Surface Splatting 

We present 3D Surface Splatting (3DSS), a differentiable renderer that represents scenes as unstructured sets of surfel primitives and reconstructs continuous surfaces through Elliptical Weighted Av-erage (EWA) splatting [Zwicker et al . 2001]. Each surfel is an ori-ented, opaque surface sample carrying physically-based material attributes; pixel values are obtained by accumulating reconstruction kernel contributions from overlapping surfels and normalizing by the accumulated weight for a given surface layer, following the clas-sical signal reconstruction formulation of surface splatting. Figure 2 showcases the rendering pipeline of our method. 

3.1 Surfel Representation and Rasterization 

A surfel in our representation is defined by its center position c ∈ R3,two tangent vectors t𝑢 , t𝑣 ∈ R3 that span the local tangent plane and encode both orientation and anisotropic scaling, and a set of shading attributes: albedo 𝝆 ∈ [0, 1]3, metallic 𝑚 ∈ [0, 1], and roughness 𝑟 ∈ [ 0, 1]. The surface normal is implicitly given by 

n = t𝑢 × t𝑣 /∥ t𝑢 × t𝑣 ∥.

T-matrix construction. To rasterize a surfel, we must determine which pixels it covers and, for each covered pixel, compute the local coordinates of the ray–surfel intersection. Both operations are uni-fied by the T-matrix —a 4 × 4 composite mapping that transforms the surfel’s unit-sphere parameterization into clip space, introduced by Weyrich et al. [2007] as an efficient and numerically stable al-ternative to the screen-space conic representation used in classical EWA splatting [Zwicker et al. 2001, 2004]. Following their formulation, we treat each surfel as a planar disc embedded in the unit sphere of the local coordinate system spanned by (t′

> 𝑢

, t′

> 𝑣

, 0), where primed quantities denote camera-space vectors. Let S = [ t′ 

> 𝑢

t′ 

> 𝑣

0 c ′ ] be the 4×4 transformation from local surfel space to camera space, and let P denote the projection matrix. The T-matrix is defined as T = PS , which maps points on the unit sphere in local surfel space to their projections in clip space. The bounding rectangle of each surfel follows from closed-form expressions involving dot products among the T-matrix rows sec-tion A.1. A symmetric depth extent 𝜀 𝑧 =√︁ t′2 

> 𝑢,𝑧

+ t′2 

> 𝑣,𝑧

· 𝑟 cut is computed in 

view space from the 𝑧 -components of the camera-space tangent vectors. This depth extent plays a central role in the interval-based surface grouping described in section 3.2. 

Ray–surfel intersection and attribute accumulation. During raster-ization, each pixel’s viewing ray is represented as the intersection of two clip-space planes, h𝑥 = (− 1, 0, 0, 𝑥 )⊤ and h𝑦 = (0, −1, 0, 𝑦 )⊤.Mapping these planes into the surfel’s local coordinate system via 

T yields two vectors k and l; their intersection with the surfel’s plane gives the local coordinates (𝑢, 𝑣 ) of the hit point. The squared distance from the surfel center, 

𝜌 2 = 𝑢 2 + 𝑣 2 , (1) determines the contribution of the surfel to the pixel. The surfel is discarded if 𝜌 2 ≥ 𝑟 2

> cut

, corresponding to the kernel support cutoff. We evaluate an unnormalized Gaussian reconstruction kernel at this distance: 

𝑤 = exp  − 12 𝜌 2  , (2) and accumulate weighted attribute contributions within each sur-face layer. We deliberately omit the 1/( 2𝜋 ) normalization constant of the Gaussian because the kernel weights serve as inputs to a 

Shepard-type normalization [Shepard 1968] performed at surface layer termination. Specifically, the reconstructed attribute at a pixel is obtained as the weighted average 

ˆa =

Í𝑘 𝑤 𝑘 a𝑘 

Í𝑘 𝑤 𝑘 

, (3) where the sum runs over all surfels within a surface layer that cover the pixel. 

3.2 Depth-Interval Grouping for Surface Separation 

A fundamental requirement of surface splatting is the ability to separate contributions from distinct surfaces that overlap in screen space. When multiple surfaces project onto the same pixel, their kernel contributions must be accumulated independently; otherwise, attribute interpolation bleeds across depth discontinuities. 

3.2.1 Interval-Based Surface Grouping. Our approach stems from the observation that the notion of “belonging to the same surface” can be formulated directly in terms of the reconstruction kernels that define the splatting framework. In surface splatting, a continu-ous surface is not an explicitly stored entity but rather an emergent property: it is constituted by the associative overlap of surfel ker-nels whose supports are mutually reachable. Each surfel’s planar Gaussian reconstruction kernel has finite support determined by the cutoff radius 𝑟 cut , and the tangent vectors t𝑢 , t𝑣 determine how this support extends along the viewing direction. Consequently, every surfel naturally occupies a depth interval in view space: given positive view-space depth 𝑧 and symmetric extent 𝜀 𝑧 ( section 3.1), the interval is [𝑧 − 𝜀 𝑧 , 𝑧 + 𝜀 𝑧 ].Two surfels belong to the same surface layer at a given pixel if and only if their depth intervals overlap, meaning that one surfel’s kernel support reaches into the region occupied by the other. A depth gap between the farthest extent of one group and the nearest extent of the next primitive indicates that no chain of overlapping kernels connects the two, and therefore they represent distinct sur-faces. Rather than making a binary or ternary per-fragment decision against a stored reference depth, we frame surface separation as an 

interval-merging problem over the sorted primitive sequence. To exploit this structure, we modify the sorting key used during tile-based binning used in point-based rendering methods; Instead of sorting primitives by center depth as in 3DGS, we sort each primitive by its depth interval start 𝑧 start = 𝑧 − 𝜀 𝑧 , i.e. its closest extent to the camera. This choice guarantees that when a primitive is visited and its interval does not overlap the running group, no future primitive in the sorted order can bridge the gap , because all subsequent interval starts are at least as large. The gap detection is therefore exact and requires no look-ahead or deferred merging. 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 5               

> Fig. 2. Rendering pipeline of 3D Surface Splatting (3DSS): custom operations in red, intermediate buffers in green, and learnable or discrete inputs on the left. (1) Preprocessing. Each surfel is transformed to view space and its T-matrix is constructed for analytic ray–surfel intersection and clip-space bounding. (2) Forward shading. Every surfel is shaded before rasterization via split-sum IBL against the co-optimized HDR environment, yielding a pre-shaded linear radiance c𝑘 .(3) Tiling & sorting. Surfels are binned into screen-space tiles and radix-sorted by the depth-interval start 𝑧 start .(4) Per-pixel rasterization.
> For each pixel, viewing rays are intersected with each surfel, a MIP-filtered EWA kernel weight 𝑤 is evaluated at the hit, overlapping depth intervals are merged into surface layers, weighted contributions are normalized, and a smooth coverage drives front-to-back compositing across all layers. (5) Output. The composited HDR image is blended with the background then tone-mapped and gamma-corrected. Gradients flow back through all operations to update the surfel parameters and the environment map.

Rasterization algorithm. algorithm 1 summarizes the per-pixel grouping procedure that runs inside the tile-based rasterization kernel. Each pixel maintains a small set of accumulators for the current surface layer and a running maximum of the group’s farthest depth extent, 𝑧 max  

> end

. Primitives are processed in sorted order; for each one, the ray–surfel intersection yields local coordinates (𝑢, 𝑣 ), and the MIP-filtered weight 𝑤 is evaluated as in eq. (6). If 𝜌 2 

> mip

≥ 𝑟 2

> cut

,the surfel does not cover this pixel and is skipped. When a surfel does cover the pixel, its depth interval [𝑧 start , 𝑧 end ] is compared against the group’s running maximum: if 𝑧 start > 𝑧 max  

> end

and the group has accumulated nonzero weight, a gap has been detected and the current layer is finalized via the compositing procedure of section 3.5. Otherwise, the group’s maximum extent is expanded and the surfel’s weighted contribution is added to the running accumulators. After all primitives have been processed, the final open group is flushed. This procedure is equivalent to a single-pass interval-merging algorithm over the sorted sequence of depth intervals, augmented with per-group EWA accumulation and compositing at each group boundary. fig. 3 illustrates the interval-merging process and the resulting sur-face separation for an example pixel receiving contributions from two distinct surfaces. 

3.3 Object-Space Signal Reconstruction and Anti-Aliasing 

Correct rendering of a point-sampled surface requires both recon-struction ; recovering a continuous signal from discrete surfel sam-ples, and band limiting ; suppressing frequencies above the Nyquist rate of the output pixel grid to prevent aliasing. We follow the EWA signal reconstruction framework [Zwicker et al . 2001] but evaluate the reconstruction kernel in the surfel’s tangent frame using object-space ray–splat intersection (section 3.1), eliminating the perspective distortion of the affine screen-space approximation. 

3.3.1 Object-Space MIP Filter. The object-space formulation re-quires the band-limiting to be expressed in the surfel’s tangent frame rather than in screen space. AA-2DGS [Younes and Boukhayma 2025a] provides such a formulation by mapping a screen-space Gaussian pixel prefilter into the local coordinate system via the Ja-cobian of the ray–splat intersection; we adopt their formulation and refer the reader to their work for the complete derivation. The key 6 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma 

Algorithm 1 Per-pixel rasterization with depth-interval grouping. 

Require: Sorted surfel list S for the current tile (sorted by 𝑧 start 

ascending), pixel coordinates (𝑥, 𝑦 ), kernel cutoff radius 𝑟 cut 

Ensure: Surface groups {G 1, G2, . . . } with accumulated color and weight  

> 1:

Initialize: group accumulators C𝑔 ← 0, 𝑊 𝑔 ← 0 

> 2:

group farthest extent 𝑧 max  

> end

← 0 

> 3:

for each surfel 𝑖 ∈ S do  

> 4:

Compute ray–surfel intersection → ( 𝑢, 𝑣 ) ⊲ section 3.1  

> 5:

Evaluate 𝜌 2 

> mip

via precomputed 𝚺 −1 

> mip

⊲ eq. (6)  

> 6:

if 𝜌 2 

> mip

≥ 𝑟 2 

> cut

then  

> 7:

continue ⊲ Surfel does not cover this pixel  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

𝑤 ← 𝑛 𝑓 · exp (− 12 𝜌 2

> mip

) 

> 10:

𝑧 (𝑖 ) 

> start

← 𝑧 (𝑖 ) − 𝜀 (𝑖 ) 

> 𝑧

, 𝑧 (𝑖 ) 

> end

← 𝑧 (𝑖 ) + 𝜀 (𝑖 ) 

> 𝑧
> 11:

if 𝑊 𝑔 > 0 and 𝑧 (𝑖 ) 

> start

> 𝑧 max  

> end

then ⊲ Gap detected  

> 12:

FlushLayer (C𝑔 ,𝑊 𝑔 ) ⊲ Finalize current group (section 3.5)  

> 13:

Reset: C𝑔 ← 0, 𝑊 𝑔 ← 0, 𝑧 max  

> end

← 0 

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

𝑧 max  

> end

← max (𝑧 max  

> end

, 𝑧 (𝑖 )

> end

) ⊲ Expand group extent  

> 16:

C𝑔 ← C𝑔 + 𝑤 · c𝑖 , 𝑊 𝑔 ← 𝑊 𝑔 + 𝑤 ⊲ Accumulate  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

if 𝑊 𝑔 > 0 then  

> 19:

FlushLayer (C𝑔 ,𝑊 𝑔 ) ⊲ Flush last group  

> 20:

end if Screen Space World Space 

> Gap

# View Space  

> Fig. 3. Interval-based surface separation. Surfels are sorted by their interval start 𝑧 start . They are merged into surface groups when their depth intervals overlap. A gap between the running group maximum and the next surfel’s interval start finalizes the current layer and begins a new one.

idea is to map a screen-space Gaussian pixel prefilter with covari-ance 𝜎 𝑓 I into the surfel’s local coordinate system via the Jacobian 

J = 𝜕 (𝑢, 𝑣 )/ 𝜕 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) of the ray–splat intersection mapping. By the closure of Gaussians under affine transformation and convolution, the combined reconstruction-plus-prefilter kernel in object space has the modified covariance 

𝚺 mip = I + 𝜎 𝑓 JJ ⊤ , (4) and the MIP-filtered Gaussian kernel is evaluated as 

𝐺 mip (u) = 𝑛 𝑓 · exp  − 12 u⊤ 𝚺 −1 

> mip

u , (5) where 𝑛 𝑓 =√︁ |I|/| 𝚺 mip | is a normalization factor that preserves the integral of the kernel and ensures energy conservation across scales. The resulting kernel widens under minification, when many surfels map to a single pixel, and reverts to the unfiltered unit-covariance reconstruction kernel at magnification, providing continuously vary-ing anti-aliasing that suppresses the sampling artifacts predicted by the Nyquist–Shannon theorem. This MIP filter addresses sampling aliasing , which is distinct from 

edge aliasing at visibility boundaries. The latter is handled by the coverage-based compositing of section 3.5. 

3.3.2 Center-Precomputed MIP Approximation. In the formulation of [Younes and Boukhayma 2025a], the Jacobian J is evaluated at each ray–splat intersection point, yielding a per-pixel MIP kernel. While this per-pixel evaluation is maximally accurate, computing J

at every intersection incurs non-trivial arithmetic cost and can in-troduce numerical instability for highly tilted or thin surfels, where the denominator of the quotient-rule derivatives of the intersection formula approaches zero. We observe that surfels are designed to be small relative to the screen and that the Jacobian varies slowly across the primitive’s screen footprint. We therefore propose to approximate J at the surfel center and precompute the inverse covariance 𝚺 −1 

> mip

and nor-malization factor 𝑛 𝑓 once per surfel during the preprocessing stage, storing them alongside the T-matrix columns in memory. During rasterization, these four parameters (the three unique entries of the symmetric 2 × 2 inverse covariance plus 𝑛 𝑓 ) are loaded into shared memory and applied directly to the (𝑢, 𝑣 ) coordinates of each intersection: 

𝜌 2 

> mip

= Σ−1 

> 𝑢𝑢

𝑢 2 + 2 Σ−1 

> 𝑢𝑣

𝑢𝑣 + Σ−1 

> 𝑣𝑣

𝑣 2 , 𝑤 = 𝑛 𝑓 · exp  − 12 𝜌 2

> mip

 . (6) This center-precomputed strategy reduces the per-intersection cost, without visual loss in filtering quality (section 4.4.2). It also simplifies the rasterization kernel during the forward and backward computations, a practical consideration given that our method al-ready performs depth-interval grouping (section 3.2) and multi-layer compositing (section 3.5) within the same pass. 

3.4 Forward Shading 

3.4.1 Shading Before Reconstruction. Our multi-layer compositing (section 3.5) requires finalizing each surface layer’s color before compositing it into the output. A deferred shading strategy would require maintaining a separate set of G-buffer channels (normals, albedo, roughness, metallic) for every concurrently open surface layer, significantly increasing per-pixel memory pressure and kernel complexity. By shading each surfel before it enters the rasterization pipeline, only pre-shaded color per surfel needs to be accumulated and normalized within each layer, and the compositing of eq. (10) operates directly on the resulting radiance values. This forward 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 7

shading design therefore arises naturally from the multi-layer ar-chitecture and keeps the rasterization kernel compact. A secondary benefit is consistency with the signal reconstruction framework. For a general non-linear shading function 𝑓 ,

𝑓 

∑︁ 

> 𝑘

𝑤 𝑘 a𝑘 



≠∑︁ 

> 𝑘

𝑤 𝑘 𝑓 (a𝑘 ) , (7) so that, strictly speaking, shading reconstructed attributes is not equivalent to reconstructing shaded values [Pharr et al. 2024]. Surface normals are a particularly important instance of this non-commutativity: unit-length directional quantities do not form a vector space, so a weighted average of unit normals requires ad hoc 

renormalization that discards the angular distribution. Our forward shading avoids the well-studied complication of filtering non-linear shading functions over aggregated normals [Ka-planyan et al. 2016; Olano and Baker 2010]. 

3.4.2 Split-Sum IBL Shading. We adopt a forward shading strategy: each surfel is shaded independently before rasterization, producing a linear HDR color value c𝑘 = 𝑓 (𝝆 𝑘 , 𝑚 𝑘 , 𝑟 𝑘 , n𝑘 , 𝝎 𝑜 ) that enters the splatting pipeline. The resampling kernel then operates on these pre-shaded values, and the normalized accumulation of eq. (3) yields the correctly filtered output. For the experiments in this paper, we employ an image-based lighting (IBL) model using the split-sum approximation [Karis and Games 2013; Munkberg et al . 2022], which provides a good trade-off between physical fidelity and computational cost and enables direct comparison with prior inverse rendering pipelines such as NVD-iffRec [Munkberg et al . 2022]. The outgoing radiance at a surfel 𝑘 

with albedo 𝝆 , metallic 𝑚 , roughness 𝑟 , unit normal n, and view direction 𝝎 𝑜 is computed as 

c𝑘 = k𝑑 𝝆 𝐿 𝑑 (n)

| {z }

> diffuse

+ 𝐿 𝑠 (r, 𝑟 )  F0 𝛽 1 + 𝛽 2

| {z }

> specular

, (8) where 𝐿 𝑑 (n) is the irradiance queried from a pre-convolved dif-fuse environment map along the surface normal, 𝐿 𝑠 (r, 𝑟 ) is the pre-filtered specular radiance queried along the reflection direction 

r = 2(𝝎 𝑜 · n)n − 𝝎 𝑜 at a MIP level determined by the roughness 𝑟 ,and (𝛽 1, 𝛽 2) are the scale and bias terms read from a precomputed BRDF integration look-up table indexed by (𝝎 𝑜 · n, 𝑟 ). The base reflectivity is F0 = 0.04 (1 − 𝑚 ) + 𝝆 𝑚 , interpolating between a dielectric Fresnel reflectance of 0.04 and the metal’s albedo. The diffuse weight is k𝑑 = (1 − F0)( 1 −𝑚 ), ensuring energy conservation between the diffuse and specular lobes. 

3.5 Multi-Layer Surface Compositing 

The depth-interval grouping of section 3.2 partitions the sorted primitive stream into surface layers 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 for each pixel. Each with accumulated colors C𝑘 and the accumulated weight 𝑊 𝑘 

normalized via eq. (3). 

3.5.1 Coverage from Accumulated Weight. In classical surface splat-ting, Zwicker et al. [2001] observe that when Gaussian basis func-tions are positioned on a regular grid with unit variance, they ap-proximate a partition of unity. After warping and band-limiting, this property is preserved: the sum of the resampling kernels at a pixel, remains close to unity for well-sampled regions. When it drops below one, it indicates that the surface does not fully cover the pixel, and it can be interpreted as a coverage coefficient . In their framework, this coverage is used in conjunction with a modified A-buffer [Carpenter 1984] for transparency: a fixed scaling thresh-old is chosen empirically, and the fragment’s scaled alpha value is clamped. In our setting, the accumulated weight 𝑊 𝑘 within each surface layer plays the analogous role of a coverage measure, but with two important structural differences. First, the summation is restricted to surfels that belong to the same layer as determined by the interval-based grouping of section 3.2, rather than being gathered across all depths via an A-buffer. Second, we replace the threshold-based clamping with a smooth, monotonically increasing mapping from accumulated weight to coverage opacity. Under the assumption that the surfel distribution approximates a partition of unity—an as-sumption that our adaptive density control mechanism (section 3.6) actively enforces—the accumulated unnormalized Gaussian weight at a fully covered pixel theoretically converges to 2𝜋 , the integral of the unnormalized unit-variance 2D Gaussian over the plane. We convert 𝑊 𝑘 to a per-layer coverage opacity using the mapping 

𝛼 𝑘 = 1 − exp  −𝛾 · 𝑊 𝑘 / 2𝜋  , (9) where 𝛾 > 0 is a gain parameter. In practice, we set 𝛾 = 2𝜋 , which yields 𝛼 𝑘 ≈ 0.998 when 𝑊 𝑘 ≈ 2𝜋 

(i.e., when the partition-of-unity condition is met), effectively indi-cating full coverage. For partial coverage at surface edges, 𝑊 𝑘 falls below this level and 𝛼 𝑘 decreases smoothly, producing a fractional coverage opacity that encodes the degree to which the reconstructed surface layer covers the pixel. 

3.5.2 Surface Layer Compositing. The 𝐾 layers are composited front-to-back by accumulating their contributions through the resid-ual fraction of the pixel not yet covered by preceding layers: 

¯𝑇 𝑘 =

Ö 

> 𝑗 <𝑘

(1 − 𝛼 𝑗 ) , Cout =

> 𝐾

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

¯𝑇 𝑘 𝛼 𝑘 ˆC𝑘 . (10) Here ¯𝑇 𝑘 denotes the residual transmittance —the fraction of the pixel area not yet accounted for by layers 1 through 𝑘 −1— ˆC is obtained via 3 and 𝛼 𝑘 is the coverage opacity of layer 𝑘 . This compositing is similar to the standard over operator [Porter and Duff 1984] applied to surfaces with coverage-derived opacity, and should be under-stood as a surface coverage model: each layer is an opaque surface that may only partially cover the pixel, and the uncovered fraction reveals deeper layers. The coverage opacity of each layer is deter-mined entirely by how densely its constituent surfels reconstruct the surface within the pixel footprint. This compositing is performed entirely within the rasterization kernel—no post-processing pass or multi-buffer readback is required. Figure 4 illustrates the composit-ing pipeline. The residual transmittance after all 𝐾 layers, ¯𝑇 𝐾 +1 = Î𝐾 𝑘 =1 (1−𝛼 𝑘 ),represents the fraction of the pixel not covered by any surface and serves as a differentiable soft silhouette mask for the rendered object. When ground-truth foreground masks are available, the total accumulated coverage 1 − ¯𝑇 𝐾 +1 can be supervised directly with a silhouette loss, providing an additional signal that encourages 8 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma Screen Space View Space   

> Fig. 4. Multi-layer surface compositing. Each detected surface layer is nor-malized and assigned a coverage-based opacity 𝛼 𝑘 . Front-to-back composit-ing via the over operator blends layers through residual transmittance.

surfels to cover the object and discourages them from drifting into empty space. 

3.5.3 Silhouette Gradient Flow. In single-layer splatting with Shep-ard normalization alone, a pixel at a surface edge receiving con-tributions from only a single surfel produces a normalized color 

ˆC = 𝑤 𝑖 c𝑖 /𝑤 𝑖 = c𝑖 , which is constant with respect to the surfel’s position and scale, effectively nullifying the gradients that would guide the optimization toward better coverage. Our multi-layer compositing circumvents this problem without auxiliary losses [Yifan et al . 2019]. Even when normalization flattens the color within a layer, the sub-unity coverage 𝛼 𝑘 produced by a low accumulated weight still modulates the final pixel value through the residual transmittance chain of eq. (10). Informative gradients therefore flow to all geometric parameters even at sparsely covered edges. This mechanism also provides a self-correcting signal: an isolated surfel that detaches from its surface layer will form its own group with low accumulated weight and consequently low 𝛼 , effec-tively reducing its contribution to the final image and encouraging it to rejoin a coherent surface. 

3.6 Adaptive Density Control 

The coverage model of section 3.5.1 assumes that surfel kernels locally approximate a partition of unity, which requires their sup-ports to overlap throughout the surface. Adaptive density control maintains this condition as the geometry evolves during optimiza-tion, similar to the densification mechanism of 3DGS [Kerbl et al .2023]. The analysis of subsequent work [2024b; 2024b] demon-strates that the choice of densification criterion directly determines whether over-reconstructed regions—those covered by only a few large primitives—are correctly identified for refinement. 

3.6.1 Densification Criterion via Screen-Space Gradients. A princi-pled criterion for densification should reflect the degree to which a primitive’s current scale and position fail to represent the un-derlying surface detail. In 3DGS [Kerbl et al . 2023], this signal is obtained by accumulating, for each Gaussian, the magnitude of the gradient of the photometric loss with respect to its projected 2D screen-space center 𝝁 𝑖 = (𝜇 𝑖,𝑥 , 𝜇 𝑖,𝑦 ), which is naturally available from the backward pass of the rasterizer. The densification criterion is then the mean over all training views: 

¯𝑔 𝑖 = 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝜕 L𝑗 

𝜕 𝝁 𝑖 2

, (11) where 𝑁 counts the views in which primitive 𝑖 contributed to the rendered image. Huang et al. [2024] resort to an ad-hoc approxi-mation, projecting the gradient of the loss with respect to the 3D center position c into the image plane. This projection introduces a discrepancy: the 3D center gradient reflects changes in 3D space, and its projection onto the image plane conflates depth and lateral motion, producing a screen-space proxy that may not faithfully capture the rendering residual. We accumulate per-pixel absolute gradient norms derived ana-lytically from the T-matrix backward pass (Eq. 12), avoiding both the projection approximation of 2DGS [Huang et al . 2024] and the gradient cancellation identified by [Ye et al . 2024b; Yu et al . 2024b]. The screen-space center of a surfel is implicitly given by (𝑝 𝑥 , 𝑝 𝑦 ) =

(𝑇 1,𝑧 /𝑇 4,𝑧 , 𝑇 2,𝑧 /𝑇 4,𝑧 ), where 𝑇 𝑖,𝑧 denotes the 𝑧 -component of the 𝑖 -th row of the projection matrix T (section 3.1). Via the chain rule through the T-matrix gradients, the per-pixel contributions to the screen-space positional gradient are 

𝑔 𝑥 = 𝜕 L

𝜕𝑇 1,𝑧 

· 𝑇 4,𝑧 , 𝑔 𝑦 = 𝜕 L

𝜕𝑇 2,𝑧 

· 𝑇 4,𝑧 . (12) 

3.6.2 Density-Aware Splitting. A surfel whose score ¯𝑔 exceeds a threshold 𝜏 𝑔 signals that the local reconstruction is inadequate, but this alone does not determine the appropriate remedy. In 3DGS [Kerbl et al . 2023], primitives whose score exceeds the threshold are cloned 

if they are small (under-reconstruction) and split if they are large (over-reconstruction), with the size criterion defined relative to a fixed fraction of the scene extent. This global scale threshold is unsuitable for our setting: it does not adapt to the local density and cannot enforce the spatially varying overlap condition required by the partition-of-unity assumption. We instead compare each surfel’s optimized scaling against the local sampling density. We maintain a spatial index structure over the surfel centers and query, for each surfel, the mean distance ¯𝑑 

to its same-orientation nearest neighbors, so that the density esti-mate reflects the local surface rather than unrelated geometry at a different depth. This mean neighbor distance approximates the local inter-sample spacing, and in the scattered-data approxima-tion framework [Wendland 2004], reconstruction kernel support should scale with this spacing to maintain continuity. More details are provided in section A.2. 

3.7 Training and Optimization 

We jointly optimize all surfel parameters—positions c, tangent vec-tors t𝑢 , t𝑣 (parameterized as a unit quaternion q and log-space scales (𝑠 𝑢 , 𝑠 𝑣 )), albedo 𝝆 , metallic 𝑚 , and roughness 𝑟 —together with a learnable HDR environment map, using the Adam opti-mizer [Kingma and Ba 2014]. 

3.7.1 Loss Function. The primary photometric loss combines ℓ1

image reconstruction with a structural dissimilarity term: 

Lphoto = (1 − 𝜆 ssim ) ∥ ˆI − I∗ ∥1 + 𝜆 ssim (1 − SSIM (ˆI, I∗)) , (13) 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 9

where ˆI is the rendered image after tone mapping and gamma cor-rection, I∗ is the ground-truth image, and 𝜆 ssim controls the relative weighting. For HDR training targets, we apply a log-space and sRGB transfer [Munkberg et al . 2022] to both ˆI and I∗ before computing the loss, compressing the dynamic range to prevent gradients from being dominated by the brightest pixels. When foreground masks are available, a silhouette loss supervises the total accumulated coverage 1 − ¯𝑇 𝐾 +1 from eq. (10): 

Lsil = IoU  1 − ¯𝑇 𝐾 +1, M∗  , (14) where M∗ is the ground-truth mask and IoU denotes the soft intersection-over-union loss. This term provides a strong signal during early training by encouraging surfels to cover the object silhouette and is disabled once adaptive density control begins, at which point the photometric loss and densification mechanism take over coverage enforcement. 

Depth consolidation regularization. Without a geometric prior, the multi-layer compositing allows the optimizer to distribute surfels across spurious depth layers. We counter this with a depth consoli-dation loss inspired by [Barron et al . 2022; Huang et al . 2024] but operating at the level of surface layers: Specifically, our depth consolidation loss comprises two comple-mentary terms: 

Lcons = 1

|P | ∑︁ 𝑝 ∈ P 

(L inter-c + L intra-c ) , (15) 

Linter-c =∑︁ 

> 𝑖 <𝑗

𝑤 𝑖 𝑤 𝑗 |𝑧 𝑖 − 𝑧 𝑗 |, Lintra-c =∑︁ 

> 𝑖

𝑤 2 

> 𝑖

𝜎 2 

> 𝑖

(16) where the sums run over the 𝐾 composited surface layers at pixel 𝑝 , and 𝑤 𝑖 = ¯𝑇 𝑖 𝛼 𝑖 , 𝑧 𝑖 , and 𝜎 2 

> 𝑖

are, respectively, the compositing weight, mean depth, and depth variance of layer 𝑖 . The inter-layer consolidation term Linter-c penalizes the allocation of compositing weight across layers that are distant from one another, driving the optimizer to consolidate all contributions into a single surface layer. The intra-layer concentration term Lintra-c penalizes depth spread within each layer, encouraging the surfels assigned to the same group to be tightly coplanar. Together, these terms enforce geometric thinness at two complementary scales. 

Normal consistency regularization. Screen-space normal regular-izers such as aligning rendered normals with depth-derived gradi-ents [Huang et al . 2024] maps conflate geometric smoothness with rendering resolution and can oversmooth geometry in our frame-work. We regularize the geometric normals of the surfel primitives directly in 3D instead. A KNN normal consistency loss penalizes angular deviation be-tween a surfel’s normal and those of its orientation-aware nearest neighbors: 

Lnc =

Í𝑖 

Í𝑗 ∈ N 𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 𝑗 (1 − n𝑖 · n𝑗 )

Í𝑖 

Í𝑗 ∈ N 𝑖 𝑤 𝑖 𝑗 

, (17) where N𝑖 denotes the set of nearest neighbors of surfel 𝑖 that share a compatible normal orientation, and 𝑤 𝑖 𝑗 = exp (−∥ c𝑖 − c𝑗 ∥2/2𝜎 2 

> 𝑖

)

are distance-dependent weights with 𝜎 𝑖 derived from the local inter-sample spacing. The neighbor index is computed via a spatial data structure that is rebuilt periodically and cached between updates to amortize the cost. The total loss is 

L = Lphoto + 𝜆 sil Lsil + 𝜆 cons Lcons + 𝜆 nc Lnc , (18) where each 𝜆 is a scalar weight, and the silhouette, consolidation, and normal terms are activated according to the training schedule described below. 

4 Results 

We evaluate 3DSS on the task of object-level inverse rendering, as-sessing geometry reconstruction, novel view synthesis, and novel scene relighting against a broad set of baselines spanning mesh-based, volumetric, and point-based representations. All experiments are conducted on Stanford-ORB [Kuang et al . 2023], a real-world benchmark comprising 14 objects captured across 7 in-the-wild scenes with ground-truth laser scans, calibrated HDR multi-view imagery, and measured environment lighting. Stanford-ORB is, to our knowledge, the most comprehensive publicly available dataset for quantitative evaluation of all three inverse rendering axes simul-taneously. We compare against methods that decompose appearance into physically-based materials and lighting: NVDiffRec [Munkberg et al .2022], InvRender [Wu et al . 2023], NeRFactor [Zhang et al . 2021b], PhySG [Zhang et al . 2021a], and NeRD [Boss et al . 2021]; novel view synthesis and reconstruction baselines that do not perform mate-rial decomposition: IDR [Yariv et al . 2020] and NeRF [Mildenhall et al . 2021]; and recent 3DGS-based inverse rendering methods: GS-IR [Liang et al . 2024b], R3DG [Gao et al . 2024], GShader [Jiang et al .2024], 3DGS-DR [Ye et al . 2024a], and RTR-GS [Zhou et al . 2025]. This selection covers the three dominant paradigms in differentiable rendering: mesh rasterization (NVDiffRec), neural volume render-ing (NeRF, IDR, and the NeRF-based inverse rendering methods), and Gaussian splatting, and situates our surface splatting approach relative to each. In addition to the standard optimization setting where geometry, materials, and lighting are jointly recovered from multi-view images, we evaluate our renderer in a fixed-geometry configuration (denoted 3DSS † in table 1): surfels are uniformly sampled on the ground-truth laser scans with positions, scales, and orientations held fixed, and only the shading parameters (albedo, metallic, roughness) and the environment map are optimized. This experiment isolates the shading fidelity of our renderer from reconstruction quality and demonstrates that the surfel representation is directly compatible with existing mesh assets. We follow the Stanford-ORB evaluation protocol throughout. Geometry is assessed via scale-invariant mean squared error (SI-MSE) on rendered depth maps, cosine distance on normal maps, and bi-directional Chamfer distance on extracted meshes. Novel scene relighting and novel view synthesis quality are measured by PSNR in both HDR and LDR (denoted PSNR-H and PSNR-L), SSIM, and LPIPS, with per-channel rescaling to account for the inherent scale ambiguity in material–lighting decomposition [Zhang et al . 2021a]. For mesh extraction, our surfel representation produces oriented point samples that serve as direct input to Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruction (SPSR) [Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013]; we additionally 10 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma 

report meshes obtained via TSDF fusion of rendered depth maps to provide a secondary extraction method. 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

Training configuration. All models are trained at 512 ×512 resolu-tion for the Stanford-ORB [Kuang et al . 2023] evaluation on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU for 30k iterations. We use HDR input images in this evaluation. We use the Adam optimizer [Kingma and Ba 2014] with learning rates following the conventions established in 3DGS-based methods. 

Initialization. We initialize the surfel set from dense depth maps produced by a monocular depth estimation foundation model (Depth Anything [Yang et al . 2024]). The predicted depth maps are unpro-jected into 3D using the known camera intrinsics for each training view, yielding a dense but potentially noisy initial point cloud. Al-ternatively, 3DSS supports initialization from a sphere enclosing the object, with surfels sampled uniformly on the sphere surface; in this case, the optimization recovers the scene geometry entirely from the photometric and silhouette losses (section 4.4.6). More details are provided in (section A.4). 

Baseline setup. For all baselines reported in table 1, we use the results provided by the Stanford-ORB benchmark [Kuang et al . 2023] or by the respective authors where available [Zhou et al . 2025]. Some methods [Gao et al . 2024; Jiang et al . 2024; Liang et al . 2024b; Ye et al . 2024a; Zhou et al . 2025] do not report some metrics because they are not applicable or not available. 

Surface extraction. We run Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruc-tion (SPSR) [Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013] with an octree depth of 11, full depth of 5, point weight of 0.8, and 10 samples per octree node. As a secondary extraction pathway, we also report meshes obtained via TSDF fusion of rendered depth maps with a voxel size of 0.004. 

Fixed-geometry configuration. For the experiment denoted 3DSS †

in table 1, we uniformly sample surfels on the ground-truth laser scans. The ground-truth meshes contain approximately 200k faces; we sample on average 5 surfels per face, yielding roughly 1M sur-fels per object. Surfel positions, scales, and orientations are held fixed throughout training, and only the shading parameters (albedo, metallic, roughness) and the environment map are optimized. Fur-ther details on this configuration are provided in section 4.2.4. 

4.2 Inverse Rendering Comparisons 

Table 1 summarizes the quantitative results of the Stanford-ORB benchmark. Qualitative comparisons against NVDiffRec on repre-sentative objects are shown in fig. 5. 

4.2.1 Novel Scene Relighting. The Stanford-ORB relighting protocol evaluates the quality of material decomposition by rendering each recovered model under the illumination of a scene different from the one used during training. 3DSS achieves the best structural similarity (SSIM) and perceptual (LPIPS) scores among all methods, while remaining competitive on PSNR. These results surpass NVDiffRec by a meaningful margin, and also improve upon InvRender [Wu et al . 2023] and NeRFac-tor [Zhang et al . 2021b], two implicit-based methods that score highest in HDR and LDR PSNR. 3DSS substantially outperforms these methods on novel view synthesis and geometry (sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.3), demonstrating greater overall versatility: the surface splatting representation provides a stronger geometric foundation that benefits all different tasks simultaneously. Compared to 3DGS-based inverse rendering methods, 3DSS achieves consistently better relighting quality. Qualitative relighting results are shown in the rightmost column group of fig. 5. 3DSS reproduces specular highlights and diffuse shading under novel illumination more faithfully than NVDiffRec, particularly on objects with moderate-to-high specularity such as the Teapot, where the correct interaction between surface normals and the environment map is critical. 

4.2.2 Novel View Synthesis. Novel view synthesis evaluates the fidelity of the reconstructed appearance by rendering the optimized model from held-out test viewpoints under the same illumination used during training. Because no lighting change is involved, this metric primarily reflects the quality of the geometric proxy and the capacity of the representation to faithfully reproduce the training appearance without overfitting to the observed views. 3DSS achieves the highest scores across all four novel view syn-thesis metrics. These results surpass every baseline by a clear mar-gin, including methods built on implicit representations, Gaussian splatting, and mesh-based rendering. The large gap relative to NVD-iffRec is attributable to the topological flexibility of the point-based representation: surfels can split and relocate freely during optimiza-tion, whereas the underlying mesh in NVDiffRec is constrained by a fixed grid resolution and connectivity. This representational advantage is consistent with the broader trend visible in table 1: mesh-based methods (NVDiffRec) underperform both implicit meth-ods and Gaussian splatting baselines on novel view synthesis, which likewise benefit from the absence of fixed topological constraints. 3DSS also outperforms the 3DGS-based baselines in this task. Among implicit methods, IDR [Yariv et al . 2020], which focuses on surface reconstruction via a signed distance function and does not perform material decomposition, achieves the strongest prior result on perceptual metrics. 3DSS matches or exceeds IDR on all four metrics while additionally recovering physically-based materials suitable for relighting. Qualitative novel view synthesis results are shown in the left-most column group of fig. 5. 3DSS reproduces fine surface detail and view-dependent appearance more faithfully than NVDiffRec, which tends to exhibit washed textured details and incorrect shad-ing, consistent with the topological limitations of the underlying mesh representation. 

4.2.3 Geometry Reconstruction. As reported in table 1, 3DSS achieves geometry scores on par with the strongest baselines. The depth and normal metrics match NVDiffRec numerically, and the Chamfer dis-tance is lower.That said, the numerical parity in rendered depth and normals does not tell the full story: the surface normals recovered by 3DSS are qualitatively smoother and more coherent than those of NVDiffRec, as visible in fig. 5. Among implicit methods, IDR [Yariv et al . 2020] achieves the strongest depth and normal scores thanks to its signed-distance-function surface representation, which imposes strong smoothness 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 11       

> Table 1. Inverse rendering comparison on Stanford-ORB .†denotes models trained with point-sampled objects from the ground-truth 3D scans. Depth SI-MSE ×10 −3. Shape Chamfer distance 2×10 −3.

Geometry Novel Scene Relighting Novel View Synthesis Depth ↓ Normal ↓ Shape ↓ PSNR-H ↑ PSNR-L ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ PSNR-H ↑ PSNR-L ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

GS-IR – – – – 25.98 0.897 0.092 – 34.80 0.960 0.047 R3DG – – – – 28.52 0.931 0.069 – 37.15 0.981 0.024 3DGS-DR – – – – – – – – 38.15 0.979 0.031 GShader – – – – 26.86 0.930 0.063 – 37.13 0.982 0.023 RTR-GS – – – – 30.10 0.944 0.053 – 39.17 0.985 0.021 IDR 0.35 0.05 0.30 N/A 30.11 39.66 0.990 0.017 NeRF 0.83 0.62 62 .05 N/A 26.31 33 .59 0.968 0.044 

Neural-PIL 0.52 0.29 4.14 N/A 25 .79 33 .35 0.963 0.051 

PhySG 0.89 0.17 9.28 21 .81 28 .11 0.960 0.055 24 .24 32 .15 0.974 0.047 

NeRD 0.60 0.28 13 .70 23.29 29 .65 0.957 0.059 25 .83 32 .61 0.963 0.054 

NeRFactor 0.50 0.29 9.53 23.54 30.38 0.969 0.048 26 .06 33 .47 0.973 0.046 

InvRender 0.58 0.06 0.44 23.76 30.83 0.970 0.046 25 .91 34 .01 0.977 0.042 

NeRO – – – – – – – – 32.60 0.933 0.082 TensoIR – – – – 28.55 0.945 0.080 – 35.18 0.976 0.040 NVDiffRec 0.31 0.06 0.62 22 .91 29 .72 0.963 0.039 21 .94 28 .44 0.969 0.030 

3DSS † 0.06 0.00 0.01 22 .18 29 .24 0.970 0.027 28 .39 37 .49 0.988 0.014 

3DSS(Ours) 0.31 0.06 0.43 23 .22 30.44 0.974 0.025 31.73 40.73 0.991 0.010               

> Novel View Synthesis Novel View Synthesis (Normals) Novel Scene Relighting
> GT NVDiffRec Ours GT NVDiffRec Ours GT NVDiffRec Ours
> Car Salt Teapot
> Fig. 5. Qualitative inverse rendering comparison on Stanford-ORB. We compare novel view synthesis, surface normal estimation, and novel scene relighting against NVDiffRec [Munkberg et al .2022] and ground truth. 3DSS recovers smoother normals and more faithful specular highlights under novel illumination.

priors on the recovered geometry. InvRender [Wu et al . 2023] sim-ilarly produces competitive normal estimates and a low Chamfer distance. 3DSS is on par with these methods in rendered depth and normals and achieves a comparable Chamfer distance, while additionally recovering physically-based materials suitable for re-lighting. For the purpose of evaluation and visualization, and to enable direct comparison with baselines that do render normal maps, we produce normal images by Shepard-normalizing the per-surfel unit normals within each surface layer and renormalizing the result to unit length. This procedure suffices for the cosine-distance metric used by Stanford-ORB, but the rendered normal maps should be 12 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma      

> GT Scan NVDiffRec Ours (TSDF) Ours (SPSR) Cactus Gnome Teapot
> Fig. 6. Mesh extraction on Stanford-ORB. Ground-truth laser scans (left) compared with NVDiffRec (DMTet extraction) and two pathways from our surfel representation: TSDF fusion of rendered depth maps, and SPSR applied directly to the oriented point cloud.

understood as a visualization convenience rather than a theoretically grounded output of the surface splatting pipeline. 

Surface extraction. Figure 6 visualizes extracted meshes on Stanford-ORB objects, comparing ground-truth laser scans, NVDiffRec meshes, and two extraction pathways from our representation: Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruction (SPSR) [Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013] applied directly to the surfel point cloud, and TSDF fusion of ren-dered depth maps. Both pathways produce meshes that reproduce the overall shape, with SPSR yielding smoother surfaces that better preserve fine geometric detail, while TSDF fusion provides a sec-ondary pathway that can be useful when a volumetric grid represen-tation is preferred downstream. The surfel representation is equally compatible with more robust and recent oriented-point-cloud re-construction methods, including feedforward methods benefiting from strong data priors, which could further improve the quality of the extracted meshes. Our intent here is to demonstrate the ver-satility of the representation: the same optimized surfel set that produces state-of-the-art novel view synthesis and competitive re-lighting can be seamlessly fed into established mesh reconstruction pipelines, bridging point-based inverse rendering and downstream mesh-based workflows. 

4.2.4 Renderer Validation: Fixed-Geometry Experiment. The fixed-geometry experiment (3DSS † in table 1) is designed to isolate the shading fidelity of the rendering pipeline from the quality of the geometric reconstruction, and to demonstrate that the surfel repre-sentation is directly compatible with existing mesh assets. In this configuration, surfels are uniformly sampled on the ground-truth laser scans, approximately 5 surfels per face, yielding roughly 1M surfels per object, with positions, scales, and orientations held fixed          

> (a) Ground truth (b) 3DSS †(1M surfels) (c) 3DSS (100K surfels)
> Fig. 7. The fixed-geometry mesh-sampled model (b) is sharper due to accu-rate ground-truth geometry and a 10 ×higher surfel count, but it exhibits blurred specular reflections and reduced appearance detail in regions where the uniform sampling density is insufficient to resolve high-frequency ma-terial variations. The fully optimized model (c) adaptively concentrates primitives in appearance-complex regions, recovering sharper reflections and finer material detail.

throughout training. Only the shading parameters (albedo, metallic, roughness) and the environment map are optimized. 

Results. The geometry metrics of 3DSS † serve as a reference base-line reflecting the quality of the ground-truth scans as rendered through our pipeline: Depth SI-MSE of 0.06, Normal cosine dis-tance of 0.00, and Chamfer distance of 0.01. These near-zero errors confirm that the surfel sampling and rendering pipeline introduce negligible geometric distortion; the point-sampled representation faithfully reproduces the original mesh geometry when surfels are placed directly on the ground-truth surface. The Chamfer distance is computed by running SPSR on the sampled surfel cloud with the same parameters used for the full optimization (section 4.1), demon-strating that the surface extraction pipeline is consistent across both the fixed and optimized configurations. On novel view synthesis, the fixed-geometry variant reaches scores that surpass NVDiffRec by a wide margin and remain com-petitive with the best 3DGS-based baselines, despite the fact that only material attributes and lighting are learnable. On relighting, the scores fall only slightly below those of the full 3DSS optimization, confirming that the shading pipeline produces physically plausible material estimates even without joint geometry refinement. 

Sampling limitations and the gap to full optimization. The uni-form sampling strategy employed in this experiment is deliberately simple, intended to demonstrate mesh compatibility rather than to maximize rendering quality. Two factors explain why the full optimization (3DSS) still achieves better rendering scores despite op-erating without ground-truth geometry, as illustrated qualitatively in fig. 7. First, the sampling density is spatially uniform across the mesh, whereas sampling theory dictates that the sampling rate should increase in regions of high-frequency geometric content: sharp edges, high-curvature features, and thin structures, to satisfy the local Nyquist condition of the reconstruction kernels [Zwicker et al .2001]. Second, since the mesh is sampled without reference to the as-sociated texture maps, the material attributes (albedo, roughness, metallic) are initialized uniformly and must be recovered entirely 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 13 

through photometric optimization, with a fixed sampling budget of approximately 5 surfels per face. The effect is visible in fig. 7(b), where specular reflections appear slightly blurred compared to both the ground truth and the fully optimized model despite the superior underlying geometry. 

4.3 Performance Analysis 

We analyze the computational cost of 3DSS along two axes: end-to-end training time on the Stanford-ORB benchmark, and rendering throughput of the forward rasterization pipeline in isolation. 

Training time. On the Stanford-ORB benchmark at 512 ×512 reso-lution, a full 30k iteration optimization of 3DSS completes in approx-imately 20 minutes on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. Increasing the training resolution to 1024 ×1024 raises the wall-clock time to roughly 30 minutes. By comparison, NVDiffRec [Munkberg et al .2022] requires approximately one hour at 512 ×512 and nearly two hours at 1024 ×1024 on the same hardware, a 2×–3× slowdown rela-tive to 3DSS. As a point-based method, 3DSS shares the same per-iteration cost structure as 3DGS-based approaches: projection, tile-based binning, sorted rasterization, and back-propagation through the surfel primitives, and we therefore expect comparable training times to other Gaussian and surfel methods operating at similar primitive counts and resolutions. 

Rendering throughput. To characterize the rendering performance of the 3DSS rasterizer independently of the shading model, we conduct a controlled benchmark on a point-sampled Stanford Bunny. The bunny mesh is converted to surfels following the procedure described in section 4.2.4, and we vary both the surfel count ( 50 K, 

100 K, 200 K, 500 K, 1M, 2M) and the output resolution ( 512 ×512 ,

1024 ×1024 , 2048 ×2048 ). The camera is placed so that the object nearly fills the viewport, minimizing the fraction of empty pixels and ensuring that the measurements reflect sustained rasterization load rather than early-out on background tiles. Each configuration is rendered along a 600-frame orbital trajectory; a 200-frame warm-up precedes each measurement to eliminate transient effects from CUDA kernel compilation and memory allocation. We report the mean over the orbit as a solid line, with shaded bands indicating ± standard deviation across frames. Figure 8 reports the results for the albedo-only configuration, which times the rasterization backend in isolation by rendering per-surfel albedo color without invoking the IBL shading pass. Across all tested configurations, the rasterizer operates well above the 60 fps in-teractive threshold. At 512 ×512 with 50 K surfels, throughput reaches approximately 900 fps; at the opposite extreme of 2048 ×2048 with 

2M surfels, it remains at 100 fps. Performance degrades gracefully with both increasing resolution and surfel count, exhibiting the ex-pected near-linear scaling in pixel count (each resolution doubling roughly halves the frame rate) and sublinear scaling in primitive count at moderate loads, steepening toward linearity only at the highest surfel densities where tile occupancy saturates. Memory consumption remains moderate across the tested range: at typical operating points ( ∼100 K surfels, 512 ×512 –1024 ×1024 ), peak GPU memory stays well below 1 GB, and only the extreme configuration of 2M surfels at 2048 ×2048 approaches multi-gigabyte usage. 100           

> 200
> 300
> 500
> 1000
> Re nde ring FPS
> Re nd e r ing P e r fo r m a n c e
> 50K 100K 200K 500K 1M 2M
> Numbe r of S urfe ls
> 50K 100K 200K 500K 1M 2M
> Numbe r of S urfe ls
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 2000
> 2500
> Pe a k GPU Me mory [MB]
> GP U Me m o r y Us a g e
> Re solution
> 512² 1024² 2048²

Fig. 8. Rendering performance of the 3DSS rasterizer. Rendering speed (top, log-scale) and peak GPU memory (bottom) as a function of surfel count for three output resolutions, measured on a point-sampled Stanford Bunny covering the full viewport. Timings isolate the full rasterization pipeline by rendering albedo color only. Each data point reports the mean over a 600-frame orbital trajectory; shaded bands indicate ± standard deviation. 

When the complete pipeline is included—split-sum IBL shading (section 3.4), environment map MIP-level generation, tone map-ping, and gamma correction—throughput decreases by a roughly constant factor across all configurations, reflecting the cost of per-surfel BRDF evaluation and environment map lookups. These stages are currently implemented in PyTorch; fusing them into dedicated CUDA kernels would bring full-pipeline performance closer to the rasterizer ceiling reported above. A detailed breakdown is provided in the supplemental material. 

4.4 Ablation Studies 

We ablate the key components of 3DSS along two complementary axes. First, we visually validate the three foundational rendering components that advance on surface splatting: depth-interval group-ing (section 4.4.1), MIP filtering (section 4.4.2), and the coverage-based edge anti-aliasing (section 4.4.3). These components resolve the visibility, aliasing, and silhouette discontinuity challenges dis-cussed in section 3, and without them the renderer cannot produce correct images; we therefore evaluate them through controlled ren-dering experiments on point-sampled objects, where ground-truth geometry is available and rendering artifacts can be examined in isolation from optimization dynamics. Second, we quantitatively ablate the optimization components: the adaptive density control strategy (section 4.4.4), the regularization losses (section 4.4.5), and the initialization strategy (section 4.4.6), on a subset of 7 object– scene pairs from Stanford-ORB, selected to span a range of surface roughnesses and specularities. Results are reported in table 2. 

4.4.1 Depth-Interval Grouping. This experiment isolates the contri-bution of our interval-based surface separation (section 3.2) by com-paring it against the ternary depth test of prior approach [Weyrich et al . 2007], which maintains only a single surface layer per pixel. We render a point-sampled Stanford Bunny at 800 ×600 resolution under three configurations (fig. 9). 

Single-layer ternary depth test (fig. 9a). Each pixel maintains one surface layer and applies the ternary depth test of Weyrich et al. [2007]: incoming fragments whose depth falls within an 𝜀 -band of the stored value are blended into the running EWA sum; fragments outside this band are either replaced or are discarded via the pass/fail 14 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma         

> (a) Single-layer ternary depth test
> (b) Ternary depth test with coverage 𝛼
> (c) Multi-layer interval grouping (ours) Fig. 9. Depth-interval grouping ablation on a point-sampled Stanford Bunny. (a) Single-layer ternary depth test produces aliased silhouettes and self-occlusion errors at concavities. (b) Adding coverage opacity smooths silhouettes but reveals background through incorrectly rejected surfels.
> (c) Our interval-based grouping resolves both issues in a single pass.

rule. Because no coverage-based opacity is involved, the normalized output is always fully opaque wherever any surfel contributes; even at silhouette pixels where only a few surfels partially cover the pixel footprint and the accumulated weight is low. This produces a characteristic hard, opaque fringe along object boundaries. The result is visually akin to a “crusty” shell that extends beyond the true silhouette: edges that should exhibit a gradual opacity falloff instead appear as solid, aliased contours. In addition to the silhouette arti-facts, self-occlusion errors are visible at high-curvature concavities, for example, inside the ear and under the chin of the bunny, where surfels from geometrically distinct surface sheets project onto the same pixel. 

Ternary depth test with coverage opacity (fig. 9b). We convert the accumulated weight of the single layer of the ternary test output into a coverage opacity and blend the result against the background. This variant softens the silhouette edges, the crusty fringe of fig. 9a is replaced by a smooth opacity falloff. However, because only a single surface layer is maintained, the self-occlusion artifacts at concavities are not resolved but exacerbated instead: where the ternary test incorrectly rejects deeper surfels that should form a second layer. The effect manifests as holes or translucent patches at high-curvature regions that reveal the background through what should be an opaque, self-occluding object. 

Multi-layer interval grouping (fig. 9c). 3DSS partitions the sorted primitive sequence into an arbitrary number of surface groups by detecting gaps in the depth-interval chain (section 3.2.1), accumu-lates each group independently with Shepard normalization, and composites the resulting layers front-to-back using the coverage-based opacity of eq. (9). This configuration produces correct self-occlusions at all concavities. Silhouettes are anti-aliased without any post-process edge detection, as the smooth coverage falloff operates independently on each layer. 

4.4.2 Object-Space Anti-Aliasing. We isolate the contribution of our center-precomputed MIP filter by rendering a textured plane, sampled with 4 M surfels carrying an alternating black-and-white checkerboard pattern, at 800 ×600 resolution under four configu-rations (fig. 10). The checkerboard is oriented so that the horizon recedes into the distance, creating a wide range of minification ra-tios within a single frame: surfel density relative to the pixel grid varies continuously from near-unity in the foreground to extreme minification at the horizon, exercising the full dynamic range of the anti-aliasing filter. 

No MIP filtering (fig. 10c). When the reconstruction kernel is evaluated without band limiting applied, the rendering exhibits the characteristic Moiré pattern of under-sampled high-frequency content.This configuration renders in 42 ms per frame, establishing the baseline cost of the rasterization pipeline without the MIP filter. 

Center-precomputed MIP filter (fig. 10a). 3DSS precomputes the Jacobian J = 𝜕 (𝑢, 𝑣 )/ 𝜕 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) of the ray–surfel intersection mapping at the surfel center and stores the resulting MIP-filtered inverse covariance 𝚺 −1 

> mip

and normalization factor 𝑛 𝑓 once per primitive during the preprocessing stage (section 3.3.2). During rasterization, these four parameters are loaded from shared memory and applied directly to the intersection coordinates via the quadratic form of eq. (6), reducing the per-pixel cost.The MIP-filtered rendering elim-inates the aliasing artifacts entirely: the checkerboard transitions smoothly from a sharp pattern in the foreground to a uniform gray at the horizon, consistent with the expected behavior of a correctly band-limited signal. This configuration renders in 50 ms per frame, an overhead of only 8 ms ( <20% ) over the unfiltered baseline, reflect-ing the minimal per-intersection cost of the precomputed quadratic form evaluation. 

Per-pixel Jacobian evaluation (fig. 10b). In the formulation of AA-2DGS [Younes and Boukhayma 2025a], the Jacobian is evaluated at each ray–splat intersection point rather than at the surfel cen-ter, yielding a per-pixel MIP kernel that is maximally accurate. We implement this variant within our pipeline to provide a direct com-parison. The resulting image is visually indistinguishable from our center-precomputed approximation, with differences confined to isolated pixels. However, this per-pixel evaluation renders in 65 ms per frame, a ∼1.3× overhead relative to 3DSS and a ∼55% increase over the unfiltered baseline, due to the additional per-intersection arithmetic required to compute the full 2×2 Jacobian, its outer prod-uct, and the matrix inverse at every covered pixel. 

Supersampled reference (fig. 10d). We render the same scene at 

1600 ×1200 with the MIP filter disabled, then downsample to 800 ×600 

via box filtering to simulate 4× supersampling anti-aliasing (SSAA). The resulting image is also somewhat free of aliasing artifacts and serves as a reference on quality. However, the supersampled rendering requires 87 ms per frame as it must rasterize four times as many pixels before downsampling. 

4.4.3 Coverage-Based Edge Anti-Aliasing. The depth-interval group-ing ablation of section 4.4.1 validates the multi-layer surface sep-aration mechanism on a single object with self-occluding concav-ities. This experiment complements that analysis by isolating the coverage-based compositing model of section 3.5 on a scene specifi-cally designed to exercise inter-object edges: two overlapping point-sampled spheres rendered at 800 ×600 resolution, where the rear sphere is offset to the right so that three distinct boundary types are visible simultaneously: foreground silhouette against the back-ground, background silhouette against the background, and the 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 15             

> (a) Center-precomputed MIP (50 ms) (b) Per-pixel Jacobian MIP (65 ms)
> (c) No MIP filtering (42 ms) (d) 4×supersampling (87 ms) Fig. 10. A point-sampled checkerboard plane (4 M surfels) rendered at
> 800 ×600 .(c) Without MIP filtering, the unfiltered reconstruction kernel cannot suppress high frequencies, producing Moiré artifacts that worsen to-ward the horizon. (a) Our center-precomputed MIP filter eliminates aliasing at a cost of only 8 ms over the unfiltered baseline, producing results visually indistinguishable from (b) the per-pixel Jacobian evaluation of AA-2DGS.
> (d) 4×supersampling serves as a reference but doubles the rendering time.

mutual overlap region where the foreground surface partially oc-cludes the rear one. 

Single-layer ternary depth test. When the rendering pipeline is restricted to a single surface layer using the ternary depth test of Weyrich et al. [2007], the final pixel color at each boundary is deter-mined entirely by the frontmost layer’s output. The consequence is clearly visible in fig. 11: all three boundary types exhibit hard, jagged transitions with no smooth blending between surfaces or against the background. 

Multi-layer compositing with coverage alpha. With our approach, the resulting layers are composited front-to-back using the standard over operator, where the residual transmittance ¯𝑇 𝑘 of preceding layers determines how much of each deeper layer is revealed. As shown in fig. 11, all three boundary types are now correctly anti-aliased: the outer silhouettes of both spheres exhibit a smooth opac-ity falloff against the background, and the overlap region blends the foreground sphere’s partial coverage with the rear sphere visible through the residual transmittance, producing a gradual transition rather than a hard step. 

4.4.4 Adaptive Density Control. The adaptive density control mech-anism described in section 3.6 introduces two design choices relative to prior 3DGS-based methods: (i) a density-aware splitting crite-rion that compares each surfel’s scale against the local inter-sample          

> (a) Single-layer (ternary depth test) (b) Coverage-based compositing (ours)
> Fig. 11. Coverage-based edge anti-aliasing ablation. Two overlapping point-sampled spheres; the rear sphere is offset to the right to expose three boundary types: foreground and background silhouettes against the back-ground, and the mutual overlap region. (a) The single-layer ternary depth test [Weyrich et al. 2007] produces aliased, jagged edges at all boundaries: Shepard normalization forces every pixel with any surfel contribution to full opacity, eliminating sub-pixel coverage information. (b) Our multi-layer compositing converts accumulated EWA weight into smooth per-layer cov-erage via eq. (9) and composites layers front-to-back through the residual transmittance of eq. (10), yielding anti-aliased silhouettes and correct inter-surface blending. Table 2. Ablation study on a representative subset of 7 object–scene pairs. Converged models are calibrated to ∼100 K surfels. Albedo PSNR-L is mea-sured against pseudo ground-truth albedo.

Configuration Relighting NVS Albedo     

> PSNR-H PSNR-L PSNR-H PSNR-L PSNR-L

Regularization losses 

w/o Lcons 24.01 30.65 32.54 41.83 40.83 w/o Lnc 24.17 30.87 33.13 42.49 41.21 w/o Lsil 24.15 30.75 32.32 41.51 41.19 

Adaptive density control 

No densification 23.56 29.98 31.47 40.87 40.51 Projected 3D gradient 23.97 30.52 32.34 41.62 40.94 Global scale threshold 23.58 30.13 31.71 40.89 40.51 

Initialization 

Sphere (100K surfels) 24.60 31.64 32.40 41.69 41.52 Full 3DSS 24.32 31.01 32.83 42.11 41.26 

spacing rather than a fixed fraction of the scene extent, and (ii) a screen-space gradient accumulation strategy that computes per-pixel absolute gradient norms directly from the T-matrix backward pass rather than relying on the ad-hoc projected 3D position gradi-ent used in 2DGS [Huang et al . 2024]. We isolate the contribution of each choice by comparing four configurations on our ablation subset of 7 Stanford-ORB object–scene pairs (table 2). To ensure that the comparisons reflect the quality of the surfel distribution rather than differences in model capacity, we calibrate the densification and pruning parameters in each configuration so that converged models contain approximately the same total surfel count ( ∼100 K). 16 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma 

No densification. When adaptive density control is disabled en-tirely, reconstruction quality degrades across all metrics. Without the ability to refine the surfel distribution, under-sampled regions retain coarse coverage that limits both geometric detail and material resolution, confirming that adaptive refinement is essential for the optimization to escape the resolution ceiling imposed by the initial point cloud. 

Global scale threshold. This global thresholding used in 3DGS densification pipeline [Kerbl et al . 2023], cannot adapt to the spa-tially varying overlap condition required by the partition-of-unity assumption (section 3.5.1): it over-splits in smooth regions where the local density already satisfies the Nyquist condition and under-splits at fine-scale features where the local inter-sample spacing is much smaller than the scene-level threshold. Replacing our density-aware criterion with this scene-percentage variant [Ye et al . 2024b] yields lower rendering scores, indicating that the global threshold fails to allocate primitives where they are most needed. 

Projected 3D position gradient. approximates the screen-space gra-dient by projecting the 3D center gradient 𝜕 L/ 𝜕 c into the image plane after the backward pass. The 3D projected gradient densifi-cation score used in 2DGS [Huang et al . 2024] leads to degraded rendering scores across all metrics. The vectorial accumulation of projected gradients allows per-pixel contributions from opposite sides of a large surfel to cancel, suppressing the densification score in over-reconstructed regions and preventing splits that would im-prove the local reconstruction [Ye et al . 2024b; Yu et al . 2024b]. Our absolute gradient accumulation via the T-matrix avoids this cancella-tion by design, keeping the densification statistics tightly coupled to the rendering computation without requiring a post-hoc projection step. 

4.4.5 Loss Function Components. We ablate the three regulariza-tion terms of the loss function (section 3.7.1) by disabling each in turn while keeping all other components unchanged. As with the densification ablation, converged models are calibrated to approxi-mately the same surfel count for comparability. Results are reported in table 2. 

Without depth consolidation ( Lcons ). Removing the depth consoli-dation regularizer yields a modest numerical drop in relighting and novel view synthesis, but the more consequential effect is on the underlying geometry. Figure 12 visualizes this effect on a top-down cross-section of the reconstructed surfel cloud for the Can object: without Lcons , the point cloud is noticeably thicker and more dis-persed along the viewing direction, whereas the regularized model concentrates contributions onto a single coherent surface layer con-sistent with the reference geometry. The depth consolidation loss directly counteracts this failure mode by penalizing both inter-layer spread and intra-layer depth variance (eq. (15)), enforcing the geo-metric thinness that a surface-based representation should satisfy. 

Without normal consistency ( Lnc ). Disabling the KNN normal con-sistency regularizer produces the highest NVS scores in this ablation, exceeding the full model. This is expected: unconstrained normals allow each surfel to orient independently to minimize the per-pixel photometric residual, effectively overfitting the shading response            

> (a) Reference (b) w/o Lcons (c) w/ Lcons (ours) Fig. 12. Effect of the depth consolidation loss. We show a top-down view cross-section of the reconstructed surfel point cloud. Without Lcons (b) ,the multi-layer compositing allows the optimizer to distribute surfels across multiple depth layers, producing a noisy, thickened shell. With the depth consolidation regularizer (c) , surfel contributions concentrate onto a single thin surface layer, yielding a clean point cloud consistent with the reference geometry (a) .

to the training views at the expense of geometric coherence. The cost appears on the relighting axis, where the unconstrained model performs slightly below the full method. The normal consistency loss thus imposes a necessary trade-off: it slightly constrains the per-view appearance fit in exchange for geometrically meaningful normals that generalize to unseen lighting conditions. 

Without silhouette regularization ( Lsil ). Removing the silhouette IoU loss degrades both convergence speed and final quality. Without explicit silhouette supervision during the warm-up phase, surfels lack a strong signal to cover the object boundary, leading to stray primitives in early training that the subsequent densification phase must correct. The converged model shows a large NVS drop in this ablation and reduced relighting quality, confirming that the silhouette loss provides complementary coverage information that accelerates the optimization and improves the final surfel distribu-tion, particularly along object boundaries where the photometric loss alone provides weak optimization signal. 

4.4.6 Sensitivity to Initialization. The default initialization of 3DSS uses dense depth maps from Depth Anything [Yang et al . 2024], a monocular depth estimation foundation model, unprojected into 3D to form the initial surfel cloud. While this provides good spatial cov-erage, it introduces a dependency on an external foundation model that may not always be available: for instance, in domains where pretrained depth estimators perform poorly or in deployment set-tings where additional model inference is undesirable. We evaluate an alternative initialization from a sphere of 100K surfels uniformly sampled on a bounding sphere enclosing the object, where geome-try must be recovered entirely from the photometric and silhouette losses. As reported in table 2, the spherical initialization achieves compet-itive and in several metrics superior scores compared to the Depth Anything initialization. 

Trade-offs. The two initialization strategies exhibit complemen-tary strengths and failure modes. The Depth Anything initialization provides a globally informed starting point: the initial surfel cloud 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 17 

roughly traces the object surface from the first iteration, giving the optimizer a strong geometric prior that helps in regions where the shading model alone cannot disambiguate geometry: for example, concave regions that are visible from few viewpoints, or surfaces whose appearance is dominated by inter-reflections that the split-sum IBL model cannot reproduce. However, the depth estimates are not perfect: noise and biases in the monocular predictions can place surfels in incorrect positions, and when these errors coincide with regions of low photometric gradient, the optimizer may fail to correct them during training, leaving the model stuck in a local minimum. The spherical initialization, starts without any geometric bias: all surfels begin on the bounding sphere and must migrate to the object surface through gradient descent. This approach avoids inheriting errors from the depth estimator and allows the optimization full freedom to place surfels where the photometric and silhouette losses dictate. The trade-off is that convergence in geometrically ambigu-ous regions relies entirely on the capacity of the shading model and regularizers to provide an informative signal; in the absence of a geometric prior, the optimizer may settle on locally optimal but globally incorrect configurations in regions of inherent ambiguity. 

5 Limitations and Future Work 

While 3DSS demonstrates competitive inverse rendering perfor-mance across geometry, novel view synthesis, and relighting, several limitations remain that we discuss in this section. 

Simplified shading model. Like NVDiffRec [Munkberg et al . 2022], our method employs the split-sum IBL approximation [Karis and Games 2013] with an isotropic GGX microfacet BRDF, which cap-tures only single-bounce, direct illumination from a distant environ-ment map. This formulation cannot represent global illumination effects: inter-reflections, cast shadows, contact darkening, or caus-tics, nor does it account for grazing-angle Fresnel effects that require a multi-lobe or measured BRDF model. Because shading is evaluated per-surfel before reconstruction (section 3.4), the rendering backend is agnostic to the shading model: replacing the split-sum evaluation with a more physically complete light transport model requires no modification to the rasterization pipeline. 

Interaction between shading model and geometry. The simplified shading model also affects the quality of the recovered geometry. When the rendering model cannot faithfully reproduce the observed appearance, the optimizer compensates by deforming the geometry to reduce the photometric residual, baking illumination artifacts into the surface shape. Implicit methods mitigate this through the smoothness priors inherent to their signed distance function or radiance field representations [Yariv et al . 2020], and mesh-based methods benefit from the connectivity constraints imposed by the topology [Munkberg et al . 2022]. Our point-based representation, by contrast, consists of scattered primitives with no explicit connec-tivity: each surfel’s position, orientation, and scale are optimized independently, subject only to the soft regularization of the depth consolidation loss Lcons and the KNN normal consistency loss Lnc 

(section 3.7.1). In challenging regions where the photometric signal is weak or misleading, the optimization of surfel scales can pro-duce local discontinuities in the reconstructed surface, as the kernel support departs from the overlap condition required by the partition-of-unity assumption (section 3.5.1). Ideally, the tangent scale of each surfel should be derived from the local sampling density to maintain signal continuity, but enforcing this constraint during optimization in a differentiable manner remains an open problem. 

Depth-interval surface separation. The interval-based grouping mechanism of section 3.2.1 determines surface layer membership through a geometric proxy: two surfels belong to the same layer if and only if their depth intervals overlap. While this criterion cor-rectly separates surfaces in the common case, it can produce errors in some degenerate configurations. For example, geometrically dis-tinct surfaces whose depth extents happen to overlap like thin shells, near-parallel layers separated by less than the surfel kernel extent, are incorrectly merged into a single group, blending their attributes. This failure mode can be mitigated by increasing the local sampling rate so that the kernel extents shrink below the inter-surface sepa-ration, a correction that the adaptive density control of section 3.6 might perform when the photometric residual signals the error. 

Opaque surface assumption. Our rendering model assumes that all scene surfaces are opaque: pixel coverage arises from the accu-mulated EWA weight of the surface layer (section 3.5.1), and no per-surfel transmittance is modeled. This is the standard assump-tion in inverse rendering methods [Kuang et al . 2023; Munkberg et al . 2022], and it holds for the objects evaluated in this work. Ex-tending the model to handle transparent surfaces would require introducing a per-surfel transparency attribute that modulates the coverage-based opacity 𝛼 𝑘 of each layer. The multi-layer structure ensures that the transmitted light from deeper surfaces is correctly integrated, and the transparency attribute would participate in the same forward shading and gradient flow as the existing material channels. We consider this a natural extension for future work, as it requires fewer architectural changes to the rasterization backend. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented 3D Surface Splatting (3DSS), a differentiable renderer that brings Elliptical Weighted Average surface splatting into the inverse rendering domain. By formulating surface separation as interval merging over the sorted primitive stream, deriving cov-erage opacity from the accumulated reconstruction weight, and shading each surfel before it enters the resampling kernel, 3DSS combines the connectivity-free flexibility of point-based representa-tions with the surface-correct image formation of mesh rasterizers, while remaining continuously differentiable through visibility. On the Stanford-ORB benchmark, 3DSS achieves state-of-the-art novel view synthesis, competitive relighting quality, and geometry on par with the strongest baselines spanning mesh-based, implicit, and Gaussian-splatting paradigms from a single, unified representa-tion. The same optimized surfel set simultaneously produces high-fidelity renderings under novel viewpoints and novel illumination while recovering surface geometry that is directly compatible with established mesh reconstruction algorithms. 18 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma 

More broadly, 3DSS demonstrates that surface splatting occupies a distinct and practically valuable position in differentiable render-ing. The representation is connectivity-free and topology-agnostic, yet image formation is surface-based by construction, with well-defined tangent frames, opaque primitives, and per-layer signal reconstruction that preserves the identity of each surface. We hope that 3DSS encourages renewed interest in surface splat-ting as a rendering framework for inverse problems in computer graphics, complementing the mesh and volumetric paradigms that currently dominate the field. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was granted access to the HPC resources of IDRIS under the allocation 20XX-AD010616156R1 made by GENCI. 

References 

Sai Praveen Bangaru, Tzu-Mao Li, and Frédo Durand. 2020. Unbiased warped-area sampling for differentiable rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 39, 6 (2020), 1–18. Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Pratul P Srinivasan. 2021. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 5855–5864. Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. 2022. Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 5470–5479. Mark Boss, Raphael Braun, Varun Jampani, Jonathan T Barron, Ce Liu, and Hendrik Lensch. 2021. Nerd: Neural reflectance decomposition from image collections. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 12684– 12694. Loren Carpenter. 1984. The A-buffer, an antialiased hidden surface method. In Proceed-ings of the 11th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques .103–108. Wenzheng Chen, Huan Ling, Jun Gao, Edward Smith, Jaakko Lehtinen, Alec Jacobson, and Sanja Fidler. 2019. Learning to predict 3d objects with an interpolation-based differentiable renderer. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019). Jian Gao, Chun Gu, Youtian Lin, Zhihao Li, Hao Zhu, Xun Cao, Li Zhang, and Yao Yao. 2024. Relightable 3d gaussians: Realistic point cloud relighting with brdf decomposition and ray tracing. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 73–89. Ned Greene and Paul S Heckbert. 2007. Creating raster omnimax images from multi-ple perspective views using the elliptical weighted average filter. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 6, 6 (2007), 21–27. Antoine Guédon and Vincent Lepetit. 2024. Sugar: Surface-aligned gaussian splatting for efficient 3d mesh reconstruction and high-quality mesh rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 5354–5363. Paul S Heckbert. 1989. Fundamentals of texture mapping and image warping. (1989). Hugues Hoppe, Tony DeRose, Tom Duchamp, John McDonald, and Werner Stuetzle. 1992. Surface reconstruction from unorganized points. In Proceedings of the 19th annual conference on computer graphics and interactive techniques . 71–78. Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger, and Shenghua Gao. 2024. 2D Gaussian Splatting for Geometrically Accurate Radiance Fields. In SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers . Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3641519. 3657428 Jiahui Huang, Zan Gojcic, Matan Atzmon, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, and Francis Williams. 2023. Neural kernel surface reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 4369–4379. Yingwenqi Jiang, Jiadong Tu, Yuan Liu, Xifeng Gao, Xiaoxiao Long, Wenping Wang, and Yuexin Ma. 2024. Gaussianshader: 3d gaussian splatting with shading functions for reflective surfaces. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 5322–5332. Haian Jin, Isabella Liu, Peijia Xu, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Songfang Han, Sai Bi, Xiaowei Zhou, Zexiang Xu, and Hao Su. 2023. TensoIR: Tensorial Inverse Rendering. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 165–174. Anton S Kaplanyan, Stephan Hill, Anjul Patney, and Aaron E Lefohn. 2016. Filtering distributions of normals for shading antialiasing. High Performance Graphics 151 (2016), 162. Brian Karis and Epic Games. 2013. Real shading in unreal engine 4. Proc. Physically Based Shading Theory Practice 4, 3 (2013), 1. Michael Kazhdan and Hugues Hoppe. 2013. Screened poisson surface reconstruction. 

ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 32, 3 (2013), 1–13. Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, George Drettakis, et al . 2023. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4 (2023), 139–1. Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). Jaroslav Krivanek. 2003. Representing and rendering surfaces with points. Postgraduate Study Report DC-PSR (2003). Zhengfei Kuang, Yunzhi Zhang, Hong-Xing Yu, Samir Agarwala, Shangzhe Wu, Jiajun Wu, et al . 2023. Stanford-ORB: a real-world 3D object inverse rendering benchmark. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Samuli Laine, Janne Hellsten, Tero Karras, Yeongho Seol, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. 2020. Modular primitives for high-performance differentiable rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 39, 6 (2020), 1–14. Marc Levoy and Turner Whitted. 1985. The use of points as a display primitive. (1985). Tzu-Mao Li, Miika Aittala, Frédo Durand, and Jaakko Lehtinen. 2018. Differentiable monte carlo ray tracing through edge sampling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37, 6 (2018), 1–11. Zhihao Liang, Qi Zhang, Ying Feng, Ying Shan, and Kui Jia. 2024a. Gs-ir: 3d gauss-ian splatting for inverse rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 21644–21653. Zhihao Liang, Qi Zhang, Ying Feng, Ying Shan, and Kui Jia. 2024b. Gs-ir: 3d gauss-ian splatting for inverse rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 21644–21653. Shichen Liu, Tianye Li, Weikai Chen, and Hao Li. 2019. Soft rasterizer: A differentiable renderer for image-based 3d reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 7708–7717. Yuan Liu, Peng Wang, Cheng Lin, Xiaoxiao Long, Jiepeng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Taku Ko-mura, and Wenping Wang. 2023. NeRO: Neural Geometry and BRDF Reconstruction of Reflective Objects from Multiview Images. ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4 (2023), 1–22. Guillaume Loubet, Nicolas Holzschuch, and Wenzel Jakob. 2019. Reparameterizing discontinuous integrands for differentiable rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 38, 6 (2019), 1–14. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ra-mamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2021. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commun. ACM 65, 1 (2021), 99–106. Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Wenzheng Chen, Alex Evans, Thomas Müller, and Sanja Fidler. 2022. Extracting Triangular 3D Models, Materials, and Lighting From Images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 8280–8290. Elizbar A Nadaraya. 1964. On estimating regression. Theory of Probability & Its Applications 9, 1 (1964), 141–142. Merlin Nimier-David, Delio Vicini, Tizian Zeltner, and Wenzel Jakob. 2019. Mitsuba 2: A retargetable forward and inverse renderer. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 

38, 6 (2019), 1–17. Marc Olano and Dan Baker. 2010. Lean mapping. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games . 181–188. Matt Pharr, Bartlomiej Wronski, Marco Salvi, and Marcos Fajardo. 2024. Filtering after shading with stochastic texture filtering. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques 7, 1 (2024), 1–20. Thomas Porter and Tom Duff. 1984. Compositing digital images. In Proceedings of the 11th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques . 253–259. Jussi Räsänen. 2002. Surface splatting: Theory, extensions and implementation. (2002). Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. 2021. Deep marching tetrahedra: a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), 6087–6101. Donald Shepard. 1968. A two-dimensional interpolation function for irregularly-spaced data. In Proceedings of the 1968 23rd ACM national conference . 517–524. Yahao Shi, Yanmin Wu, Chenming Wu, Xing Liu, Chen Zhao, Haocheng Feng, Jian Zhang, Bin Zhou, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang. 2025. Gir: 3d gaussian inverse rendering for relightable scene factorization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2025). Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. 2021. NeuS: Learning Neural Implicit Surfaces by Volume Rendering for Multi-view Reconstruction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .Geoffrey S Watson. 1964. Smooth regression analysis. Sankhy¯ a: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series A (1964), 359–372. Holger Wendland. 2004. Scattered data approximation . Vol. 17. Cambridge university press. Tim Weyrich, Simon Heinzle, Timo Aila, Daniel B Fasnacht, Stephan Oetiker, Mario Botsch, Cyril Flaig, Simon Mall, Kaspar Rohrer, Norbert Felber, et al . 2007. Ahardware architecture for surface splatting. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 

26, 3 (2007), 90–es. 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 19                       

> Haoqian Wu, Zhipeng Hu, Lincheng Li, Yongqiang Zhang, Changjie Fan, and Xin Yu. 2023. Nefii: Inverse rendering for reflectance decomposition with near-field indirect illumination. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 4295–4304. Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Xiaogang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. 2024. Depth anything: Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data. In
> Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition .10371–10381. Yuxuan Yao, Zixuan Zeng, Chun Gu, Xiatian Zhu, and Li Zhang. 2024. Reflective gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19282 (2024). Lior Yariv, Jiatao Gu, Yoni Kasten, and Yaron Lipman. 2021. Volume Rendering of Neural Implicit Surfaces. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .Lior Yariv, Yoni Kasten, Dror Moran, Meirav Galun, Matan Atzmon, Basri Ronen, and Yaron Lipman. 2020. Multiview neural surface reconstruction by disentangling geometry and appearance. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), 2492–2502. Keyang Ye, Qiming Hou, and Kun Zhou. 2024a. 3d gaussian splatting with deferred reflection. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers . 1–10. Zongxin Ye, Wenyu Li, Sidun Liu, Peng Qiao, and Yong Dou. 2024b. Absgs: Recovering fine details in 3d gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM international conference on multimedia . 1053–1061. Wang Yifan, Felice Serena, Shihao Wu, Cengiz Öztireli, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. 2019. Differentiable surface splatting for point-based geometry processing. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG) 38, 6 (2019), 1–14. Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma. 2025a. Anti-aliased 2d gaussian splatting. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma. 2025b. TextureSplat: Per-Primitive Texture Mapping for Reflective Gaussian Splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13348 (2025). Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Binbin Huang, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. 2024a. Mip-Splatting: Alias-free 3D Gaussian Splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 19447–19456. Zehao Yu, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. 2024b. Gaussian opacity fields: Efficient adaptive surface reconstruction in unbounded scenes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 43, 6 (2024), 1–13. Kai Zhang, Fujun Luan, Qianqian Wang, Kavita Bala, and Noah Snavely. 2021a. Physg: Inverse rendering with spherical gaussians for physics-based material editing and relighting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 5453–5462. Xiuming Zhang, Pratul P Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Paul Debevec, William T Free-man, and Jonathan T Barron. 2021b. Nerfactor: Neural factorization of shape and reflectance under an unknown illumination. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)
> 40, 6 (2021), 1–18. Yongyang Zhou, Fanglue Zhang, Zichen Wang, and Lei Zhang. 2025. RTR-GS: 3D Gaussian Splatting for Inverse Rendering with Radiance Transfer and Reflection. In
> Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia . 6888–6897. Matthias Zwicker, Hanspeter Pfister, Jeroen Van Baar, and Markus Gross. 2001. Surface splatting. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques . 371–378. Matthias Zwicker, Jussi Rasanen, Mario Botsch, Carsten Dachsbacher, and Mark Pauly. 2004. Perspective accurate splatting. In Proceedings-Graphics Interface . 247–254.

A Appendix A.1 Implementation Details 

Bounding Box and T-matrix Computations. The bounding rectan-gle of the projected surfel is found by solving for clip-space planes 

h𝑥 = (− 1, 0, 0, 𝑥 )⊤ and h𝑦 = (0, −1, 0, 𝑦 )⊤ that are tangent to the unit sphere under the mapping ¯h = T⊤h. Because the computation only involves the inverse-transpose of T, it remains numerically stable even for degenerate (infinitesimally thin) surfels—a property that is critical in our setting where surfel tangent scales can become very small during optimization. In practice, we store the three non-degenerate rows of T as vec-tors T1, T2, T4 ∈ R3 (the third row corresponding to depth is unused for bounding-box computation). The screen-space center (𝑝 1, 𝑝 2)

and half-extents (ℎ1, ℎ 2) of the bounding rectangle follow from a closed-form expression involving dot products among these vec-tors [Weyrich et al. 2007]. 

Maximum layer count. The multi-layer compositing of section 3.5 can in principle produce an unbounded number of surface layers per pixel. For the backward pass, per-layer statistics must be stored to enable gradient computation through the residual transmittance chain (section A.1). We therefore cap the maximum number of com-posited layers at 𝐾 max = 16 per pixel: once the 𝐾 max -th layer has been finalized, subsequent groups are discarded. Most pixels en-counter typically 1–3 for object-level scenes, and the cap is reached only at complex depth discontinuities. 

Cutoff radius. As described in section 3.1, we use a kernel cutoff radius of 𝑟 cut = 3 standard deviations throughout all experiments. This value governs the screen-space bounding box extent for tile-based binning (scaled by 𝑟 cut relative to the T-matrix-derived half-extents), the view-space depth interval 𝜀 𝑧 for surface separation, and the per-pixel acceptance test 𝜌 2 

> mip

< 𝑟 2 

> cut

that determines whether a surfel contributes to a given pixel. 

Rasterization kernel. The forward and backward passes are imple-mented as custom CUDA kernels following the tile-based rasteriza-tion paradigm of 3DGS [Kerbl et al . 2023]. Tiles of 16 × 16 pixels are processed by individual thread blocks; within each tile, sorted sur-fels are loaded into shared memory in batches. The depth-interval grouping, MIP-filtered kernel evaluation, Shepard normalization, and front-to-back compositing are all fused into a single kernel invocation per tile in the forward pass. The backward pass replays the same grouping logic to reconstruct per-layer statistics before distributing gradients to individual surfels via atomic operations. 

Backward Pass Implementation of Multi-Layer Compositing. The backward pass through the multi-layer compositing is implemented as a two-pass procedure within the rasterization kernel. In the first pass, the forward gap detection is replayed to reconstruct the per-layer totals {( C𝑘 ,𝑊 𝑘 )} 𝐾 𝑘 =1. In the second pass, primitives are re-traversed, each is assigned to its layer, and per-layer gradients are decomposed into per-surfel gradients through the normalized ac-cumulation, with atomic operations to handle concurrent writes from different pixels. Gradients flow correctly through all 𝐾 layers, the coverage chain, the weight normalization, and the exponential saturation function, ensuring that every primitive in every layer receives gradient signal from the final composited image. 

A.2 Density-Aware Densification 

A.2.1 Splitting Surfels. A surfel is marked for splitting when its densification criterion satisfies ¯𝑔 ≥ 𝜏 𝑔 , and its maximum tangent scale max (𝑠 𝑢 , 𝑠 𝑣 ) exceeds the local mean neighbor distance ¯𝑑 . The second condition targets over-reconstructed primitives whose kernel support is too wide relative to the local point distribution as the dominant cause of over-reconstruction artifacts. By coupling the scale criterion to the local density rather than a global constant, the method adapts spatially without requiring scene-dependent parameter tuning. When a surfel is selected for splitting, it is replaced by two chil-dren positioned at c ± 𝑠 max  

> 2

ˆtmax along the normalized major tangent axis ˆtmax . The scale along the split axis is reduced by a factor of 

0.7, yielding enough mutual overlap between siblings to maintain signal continuity, while the orthogonal tangent scale is preserved. 20 • Mae Younes and Adnane Boukhayma 

All material attributes are inherited from the parent. This determin-istic two-way split increases model complexity gradually and keeps both children coplanar with the parent, preserving local surface coherence. 

A.2.2 Pruning Surfels. 

Visibility-based pruning. At the end of each training epoch, surfels whose cumulative screen-space gradient magnitude across all views is zero are removed. A zero gradient implies that the surfel was never reached during the backward pass—because it was persistently occluded, lays outside all camera frustums, or failed the kernel cutoff test at every pixel—and therefore carried no information about the scene. 

Isolation-based pruning. The spatial index is also queried to deter-mine whether each surfel has at least one neighbor within its kernel support radius. A surfel with no such neighbor is isolated : its re-construction kernel has no overlapping support with the rest of the point cloud and cannot participate in the associative kernel overlap that defines a coherent surface layer (section 3.2.1). Such primitives form degenerate single-surfel groups with low accumulated weight and consequently low coverage 𝛼 , contributing negligibly to the final image while consuming computational resources; they are therefore removed. 

A.3 Training Schedule 

Training proceeds through three phases. In the warm-up phase, only the photometric and silhouette losses are active, allowing the surfel set to deform toward the observed images under the initial sparse coverage. In the densification phase, adaptive density control (section 3.6) is enabled: surfels are split and pruned at regular inter-vals, the silhouette loss is disabled, and the geometric regularizers (Lcons , Lnc ) are activated. When ground-truth masks are available, an additional mask-based pruning pass periodically removes floater surfels that consistently project outside the foreground mask across a majority of training views, providing a complementary geometric signal to the visibility-based and isolation-based pruning of sec-tion A.2.2. In the refinement phase, densification is frozen and the model is fine-tuned with all remaining losses until convergence. 

A.4 Initialization details 

When using Depth Anything model [Yang et al . 2024], normal maps are estimated from the spatial gradients of the depth maps and used to orient the initial surfels. This procedure yields an initial point cloud of 50k surfels per scene. Over the course of optimization, the adaptive density control mechanism (section 3.6) refines the surfel distribution through splitting and pruning; converged models contain approximately 100k surfels on average. Initial tangent scales are set isotropically to the mean orientation-aware KNN distance multiplied by a scale factor 𝜎 𝑓 = 1.5, ensur-ing that the initial kernel supports overlap and approximate the partition-of-unity condition required by the coverage model. Rota-tions are initialized from the estimated point normals by computing the quaternion that aligns the local 𝑧 -axis with the surface normal. Albedo is initialized from the point colors when available. Metallic and roughness are initialized to 0.5 and 0.1 respectively in activated 50           

> 100
> 200
> 300
> Re nde ring FPS
> Re nd e r ing P e r fo r m a n c e
> 50K 100K 200K 500K 1M 2M
> Numbe r of S urfe ls
> 50K 100K 200K 500K 1M 2M
> Numbe r of S urfe ls
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 2000
> 2500
> 3000
> 3500
> Pe a k GPU Me mory [MB]
> GP U Me m o r y Us a g e
> Re solution
> 512² 1024² 2048²

Fig. 13. Full-pipeline rendering performance. Rendering speed (top, log-scale) and peak GPU memory (bottom) as a function of surfel count for three output resolutions, measured on a point-sampled Stanford Bunny covering the full viewport. Timings include the complete forward rendering pipeline: split-sum IBL shading, environment map MIP-level generation, tone mapping, and gamma correction. Each data point reports the mean over a 600-frame orbital trajectory; shaded bands indicate ± standard deviation. 

space, reflecting a neutral starting point that allows the optimization to discover both dielectric and metallic materials. The environment map is initialized to a uniform low-energy state. 

A.5 Full-Pipeline Rendering Performance 

Figure 13 reports the rendering performance of the complete 3DSS forward pipeline, including split-sum IBL shading, environment map MIP-level generation, tone mapping, and gamma correction, using the same point-sampled Stanford Bunny setup and measurement protocol described in (section 4.3). The additional overhead relative to the albedo-only rasterizer tim-ings (main paper, Fig. 6) reduces throughput by a roughly constant factor across all surfel counts and resolutions, confirming that the overhead is dominated by the per-surfel shading cost rather than by the rasterization backend. The IBL evaluation, tone mapping, and gamma correction stages are currently implemented in PyTorch using standard tensor operations and autograd; a fused CUDA ker-nel implementation of these stages would narrow the gap to the albedo-only timings and bring full-pipeline performance closer to the rasterizer ceiling. 

A.6 Surface Extraction 

A practical consequence of the surfel representation is that the optimized point cloud constitutes an oriented point set by con-struction, making it directly compatible with off-the-shelf surface reconstruction algorithms without auxiliary extraction procedures. Each surfel carries a well-defined position c and an oriented unit normal n derived from the tangent frame, constituting an oriented point cloud in the classical sense of the surface reconstruction lit-erature [Hoppe et al . 1992]. Standard algorithms that operate on oriented point samples—most notably Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruction (SPSR) [Kazhdan and Hoppe 2013]—can therefore be applied directly to the output of the optimization, yielding a wa-tertight triangle mesh suitable for downstream tasks such as physics simulation, fabrication, or integration into conventional mesh-based rendering pipelines. This contrasts with volumetric representations such as 3DGS [Kerbl et al . 2023], where recovering an explicit surface requires indirect 3DSS: 3D Surface Splatting for Inverse Rendering • 21 

procedures—typically TSDF fusion from rendered depth maps [Huang et al . 2024] or coupling to an auxiliary mesh proxy [Guédon and Lepetit 2024]—that introduce additional pipeline stages and scene-dependent parameters. In our formulation, the point cloud is the surface representation, and mesh quality depends primarily on the downstream reconstruction algorithm rather than on an intermedi-ate conversion step. A subtlety that arises from the Shepard normalization of eq. (3). In regions where the surfel kernels maintain sufficient overlap to approximate a partition of unity, the normalized accumulation acts as a kernel interpolant : the reconstructed signal passes through (or near) the sample values, and the optimized surfel positions converge to points that lie on the target surface. In under-sampled regions where the partition-of-unity condition is not met—for instance at surface boundaries or in areas of rapid geometric variation—the nor-malization renders the reconstruction closer to a kernel regression or Nadaraya–Watson estimator [Nadaraya 1964; Watson 1964], which produces a smoothed approximation of the underlying function rather than an interpolant. In this regime, the optimized surfel cen-ters may not lie exactly on the true surface but instead at positions that minimize the photometric objective under the smoothing bias of the estimator. This distinction has practical implications for the choice of surface reconstruction algorithm: methods that assume the input points interpolate the surface—such as SPSR with high interpolation weight—may produce artifacts in under-sampled re-gions, whereas approximation-based approaches that incorporate a smoothness prior, such as NKSR [Huang et al . 2023], are better suited to handle the residual positional bias. In practice, SPSR re-mains effective when operated with a reduced interpolation weight (the pointWeight parameter), which relaxes the interpolation con-straint and allows the Poisson solve to regularize the reconstructed surface. Physically-based material attributes—albedo, roughness, and metallic—can subsequently be transferred from the surfel point cloud to the mesh vertices via nearest-neighbor or radial-basis-function interpolation, producing a fully textured mesh ready for relighting and material editing in standard rendering engines. 

A.7 Surfel parameterization from mesh sampling 

Given a triangle mesh, point positions and face normals are ob-tained directly from the sampling procedure. The remaining surfel parameters—tangent vectors and scales—must be estimated from the local neighborhood structure of the sampled point cloud. We experiment with two strategies: (i) Isotropic scaling. Tangent vectors are constructed from the sampled normal direction using a standard orthonormal frame construction, and the tangent scale is set isotrop-ically to the mean distance to orientation-aware nearest neighbors—the same mechanism used during optimization initialization and in the splitting criterion of section 3.6.2, sharing the same spatial acceleration structure. This ap-proach is computationally efficient but can produce minor visual artifacts at sharp geometric edges where an isotropic kernel does not conform well to the local surface curvature. (ii) Anisotropic scaling. Neighboring points that share a com-patible normal orientation are projected onto the tangent plane defined by the sample normal, and a 2D principal component analysis (PCA) is performed on the projected co-ordinates. The eigenvectors of the resulting 2×2 covariance matrix define the tangent directions, and the correspond-ing eigenvalues determine anisotropic scales that adapt the kernel shape to the local point distribution. This approach eliminates the edge artifacts observed with isotropic kernels, at the cost of higher computational overhead and memory consumption for the eigendecomposition. In the experiments reported in table 1, we use the anisotropic vari-ant for its quality; the isotropic variant is available as a drop-in replacement when performance is critical.