Title: SoLAR: Error-Resilient Streamable Long-Horizon Free-Viewpoint Video Reconstruction with Anchor Activation and Latent Recalibration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.07346v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 00:56:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 1

# SoLAR: Error-Resilient Streamable Long-Horizon Free-Viewpoint Video Reconstruction with Anchor Activation and Latent Recalibration 

Haotian Zhang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Xu Mo, Yixin Yu, Guanhua Zhu, Jian Xue, Tongda Xu, Yan Wang, Jiaqi Zhang, Siwei Ma, Fellow, IEEE , and Wen Gao, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —Free-Viewpoint Video (FVV) has emerged as acornerstone of next-generation immersive media systems and attracted widespread attention. Previous methods primarily focus on short video sequences and suffer from significant perfor-mance degradation when processing long-horizon free-viewpoint video (LFVV). Motivated by bit allocation theory, we analyze dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video representation within a rate-distortion optimization framework and propose SoLAR, which is the first error-resilient streamable FVV framework that maintains stable reconstruction quality on long sequences without requiring group-of-pictures partitioning. We propose the Anchor Activation Dynamics (AAD), which enables dynamic anchors to model non-rigid transformations by dynamically activating informative anchors and suppressing redundant ones. Further-more, we introduce Latent Discrepancy Aware Recalibration (LaDAR), which is a mechanism to identify discrepancies be-tween latent representations and recalibrate the correspondences encoded in the network, effectively mitigating error propagation in LFVV without compromising real-time performance or stor-age compactness. Extensive experiments demonstrate that So-LAR achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction performance while maintaining minimum storage overhead, which provides a new direction for LFVV reconstruction and advances the practical deployment of immersive systems. Demo free-viewpoint videos are provided in the supplementary material. 

Index Terms —3D Gaussian splatting, dynamic scene recon-struction, long-horizon free-viewpoint video, video coding. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Free-Viewpoint Video (FVV), also referred to as volumet-ric video, has emerged as a cornerstone of next-generation immersive media systems [1]–[3]. While this technology en-ables dynamic scene exploration from arbitrary viewpoints, its pronounced spatio-temporal complexity poses persistent chal-lenges in simultaneously achieving high reconstruction quality 

and efficient storage [4]. Although offline approaches [5]– [7] are capable of achieving high-quality reconstruction, their requirement for access to the complete video sequence dur-ing training prevents them from meeting the low-latency demands of real-time applications such as streaming media 

H. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Ma, and W. Gao are with the National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking Uni-versity, Beijing 100871, China (e-mail: htzhang25@stu.pku.edu.cn; {jqzhang, swma, wgao }@pku.edu.cn). X. Mo, Y. Yu, G. Zhu, and J. Xue are with the School of Computer Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China (e-mail: {moxu2123, yuyx1723, zhugh2424, xuejian2124 }@mails.jlu.edu.cn). T. Xu and Y. Wang are with Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: x.tongda@nyu.edu; wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn). 

and immersive live broadcasting. To address this limitation, recent methods [8]–[11] have adopted streamable (i.e., on-the-fly) reconstruction frameworks that progressively model inter-frame deformation for frame-by-frame reconstruction, achiev-ing excellent real-time performance. Among these approaches, iFVC [9] introduces a dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video representation that models the first frame with anchors and represents each subsequent frame with a compact binary transformation cache (BTC), enabling compact storage and high-quality reconstruction. Despite these advancements, existing streaming reconstruc-tion models have been primarily evaluated on short video se-quences of about 300 frames [8]–[11]. In contrast, the problem of long-horizon free-viewpoint video (LFVV) reconstruction, which often involves more than 1,000 frames , remains largely 

underexplored . However, real-world videos are typically much longer, and this gap in the literature hinders the practical deployment of immersive systems. Therefore, systematic in-vestigation of LFVV reconstruction is essential. LFVV re-construction is particularly challenging because objects in the video may undergo large-amplitude motion or even disappear 

over time, which imposes significant demands on the modeling capacity and temporal robustness of reconstruction meth-ods [12]. Our investigation reveals that critical bottlenecks remain in achieving stable streamable LFVV reconstruction. As shown in Fig. 1, current state-of-the-art (SOTA) streaming methods suffer from significant performance degradation when processing LFVV. This degradation is primarily caused by the limited representational capacity of the model and the error propagation through continuous inter-frame transformations. A straightforward approach to address this issue is to parti-tion the long video sequence into several groups of pictures (GOP) [13]. However, this strategy introduces substantial latency and storage overhead, degrading both the real-time efficiency and overall rate–distortion (RD) performance [14]. Thus, effectively mitigating error propagation in LFVV while preserving compact storage and real-time processing remains a highly challenging and underexplored problem [1]. To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose 

SoLAR , the first error-resilient streamable FVV framework specifically designed for LFVV reconstruction. Unlike existing approaches that often suffer from severe quality degradation as the sequence length increases, SoLAR maintains stable reconstruction quality over long sequences without requiring GOP partitioning, thereby preserving the low-latency and                                 

> arXiv:2605.07346v1 [cs.CV] 8 May 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 2Frame 1000 Frame 2000 Frame 3000 Frame 3539 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
> Frame
> 22
> 24
> 26
> 28
> 30
> 32
> PSNR
> SoLAR
> iFVC
> 3DGStream
> 4DGC
> HiCoM
> Recon-GS 2500 2750 3000 3250 3500
> 20
> 21
> Fig. 1. (a) Qualitative results of a long free-viewpoint video (FVV). Split-view frames compare SoLAR (left) with iFVC (right): iFVC shows visible visual deterioration over time, while SoLAR preserves fine details and high-fidelity rendering. (b) Reconstruction quality trends. Competing methods suffer severe performance decay from error propagation, whereas SoLAR mitigates this, showing robust error-resilient performance in long-horizon videos.

storage-efficient characteristics that are essential for practi-cal streaming scenarios. To overcome the limited modeling capacity of existing streaming methods, we propose Anchor Activation Dynamics (AAD) . The key idea is to endow dynamic anchors with the ability to adaptively allocate rep-resentational capacity according to evolving scene content, so that informative anchors are activated while redundant ones are suppressed. As a result, AAD enables more effective modeling of non-rigid transformations and complex long-term motion, while simultaneously improving both scene compactness and representational expressiveness. Furthermore, to mitigate error propagation while preserving compact storage and real-time processing, we draw inspiration from bit allocation theory in traditional video coding [14]–[17] and analyze dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video representation within a RD optimization framework under rate control. Based on this anal-ysis, we introduce Latent Discrepancy Aware Recalibration (LaDAR) , which identifies discrepancies between latent rep-resentations and uses them to recalibrate the correspondences encoded in the network. This design effectively suppresses the accumulation of temporal errors during streaming recon-struction, thereby improving long-horizon stability without sacrificing real-time performance or storage compactness. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SoLAR achieves SOTA reconstruction quality while maintaining minimum stor-age overhead. In particular, compared with existing state-of-the-art methods such as Recon-GS [11], SoLAR improves reconstruction fidelity by approximately 3 dB on short se-quences, while simultaneously reducing storage overhead by 

6×. More importantly, the superiority of SoLAR becomes even more evident in the long-horizon setting, where accu-mulated errors pose substantially greater challenges: on such sequences, the reconstruction gain further increases to approx-imately 4 dB, accompanied by a substantial 10 × reduction in storage requirements. These results indicate that the pro-posed framework not only improves the conventional quality– efficiency trade-off, but also delivers markedly stronger tempo-ral robustness as the sequence length increases. By effectively mitigating error propagation without relying on GOP partition-ing, SoLAR establishes a practical and scalable solution for LFVV reconstruction, opening a promising direction for long-horizon streamable volumetric video modeling and advancing the real-world deployment of immersive media systems. Our main contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We address the previously underexplored problem of long-horizon free-viewpoint video (LFVV) reconstruction and propose SoLAR , the first error-resilient streamable FVV framework designed to maintain stable reconstruc-tion quality over long sequences without resorting to GOP partitioning. By eliminating repeated restarts of temporal modeling, SoLAR preserves the low-latency and storage-efficient properties required by practical streaming and immersive media systems, thereby establishing a new paradigm for streamable LFVV reconstruction.  

> •

We propose Latent Discrepancy Aware Recalibration (LaDAR) , a principled mechanism for suppressing long-term error accumulation in streaming reconstruction. Specifically, dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video rep-resentation is analyzed from the perspective of rate-distortion optimization under rate control, which provides the basis for identifying latent discrepancies that are strongly correlated with temporal degradation. Building on this analysis, LaDAR recalibrates the learned corre-spondences encoded in the network, thereby effectively mitigating error propagation while preserving compact storage and real-time processing capability.  

> •

We introduce Anchor Activation Dynamics (AAD) 

to enhance the modeling capacity of streamable recon-struction for complex long-horizon motions. Instead of relying on a fixed set of active anchors throughout the sequence, AAD enables dynamic anchors to adaptively activate informative components and suppress redundant ones according to evolving scene content. This design improves the ability of the representation to capture non-rigid transformations and large-amplitude motion, while simultaneously promoting compactness and more efficient use of representational capacity.  

> •

We implement a free-viewpoint rendering pipeline tai-lored to dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video repre-sentation. The pipeline enables reconstructed results to be observed from arbitrary viewpoints, thereby supporting immersive visualization. Demo videos are provided in the supplementary material.  

> •

We conduct extensive experiments to verify the effec-tiveness of SoLAR in both reconstruction quality and storage efficiency. The results consistently demonstrate IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 3

that SoLAR outperforms existing state-of-the-art meth-ods on both short and long sequences, with particularly pronounced advantages in the long-horizon setting where temporal drift and accumulated errors become severe. These findings confirm that the proposed framework provides a stable, efficient, and practically deployable solution for LFVV reconstruction. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec. II reviews the most relevant prior work. Sec. III introduces the preliminaries of the proposed framework. Sec. IV presents the proposed SoLAR in detail. Sec. V describes the experimental setup and reports the corresponding results and analyses. Finally, Sec. VI concludes the paper. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Static Scene Reconstruction 

Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [18], [19] has gradually supplanted Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)-based methods [20] as the dominant approach for static scene re-construction. Nevertheless, the substantial storage overhead of 3DGS remains a major obstacle to its practical deployment, especially when a large number of Gaussian primitives is required to preserve fine-grained appearance and geometry details [21]–[24]. This challenge has consequently motivated a growing body of work on more compact 3DGS representations while preserving rendering fidelity [25]–[28]. Existing compact 3DGS methods can be broadly cate-gorized into several directions. Some approaches [29], [30] aim to prune Gaussian primitives, for example by removing uninformative Gaussians using trainable mask mechanisms or gradient-based thresholding strategies. These methods reduce memory and storage consumption by directly suppressing redundant splats, but their compression performance is often closely tied to the quality of the pruning criterion and may sacrifice local details when aggressive pruning is applied. Other works, such as Scaffold-GS [31], achieve effective storage reduction by clustering Gaussians into anchors and implicitly representing Gaussian attributes within each cluster using Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), where Gaussian offsets can be predicted from anchor features to further improve representation compactness. This anchor-based paradigm is attractive because it replaces explicit storage of dense Gaus-sian attributes with a more structured latent representation. Moreover, HAC [24], [32] further compresses 3DGS by in-corporating spatial structure priors into entropy encoders and related compression techniques, demonstrating the importance of exploiting structural redundancy for compact representation. 

B. Dynamic Scene Reconstruction 

Dynamic 3D scene reconstruction is one of the most chal-lenging problems in computer vision and can be broadly divided into two paradigms [1], [33]. The first paradigm consists of offline methods [34]–[39], which train high-quality and temporally consistent dynamic scene representations by accessing the complete video sequence during offline opti-mization. Since all frames are jointly available during training, such methods can better enforce temporal coherence and often achieve strong reconstruction quality [40]. However, the reliance on full-sequence data during training prevents these methods from satisfying the low-latency requirements of real-time applications and makes them less suitable for streamable free-viewpoint video systems [8], [9]. The second paradigm adopts streaming or online frameworks that first reconstruct a high-quality initial representation for the first frame and then model subsequent frames through deformation fields [8], [41]–[43]. Compared with offline methods, this setting is more practical for real-time free-viewpoint video transmission because it avoids repeatedly optimizing a complete sequence from scratch. A major challenge in this setting is the sub-stantial storage overhead introduced by per-frame parame-ters [44]. To reduce this burden, iFVC [9] proposes a dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video representation that models the first frame using anchors and represents each subsequent frame with a compact binary transformation cache, thereby significantly reducing storage overhead. Despite its compact design, iFVC also reveals the core difficulty of streamable dynamic reconstruction. Specifically, the fixed anchor set con-strains its ability to represent non-rigid deformations, and the shared Gaussian attribute network may gradually accumulate large discrepancies as the sequence evolves. These limitations lead to insufficient representational capacity and severe error propagation over time. Therefore, although recent streaming methods have improved efficiency, maintaining both compact storage and stable reconstruction quality over long sequences remains an open challenge [1]. 

C. Long-Horizon Free-Viewpoint Video Reconstruction 

Despite substantial progress in dynamic scene reconstruc-tion [6], [7], most existing methods focus on short se-quences of around 300 frames, whereas scenarios involving much longer sequences, often exceeding 1,000 frames , remain largely underexplored. Compared with conventional short-horizon dynamic reconstruction, long-horizon streamable free-viewpoint video reconstruction poses additional challenges, since temporal errors can accumulate over time [4], [11], [45]– [47], progressively degrading reconstruction fidelity and tem-poral stability under strict streaming constraints. In this setting, compact storage alone is insufficient. A practical framework must also suppress error propagation while preserving real-time efficiency and favorable RD performance [48], [49]. Existing efforts on long-horizon volumetric videos mainly follow two directions. The first focuses on offline repre-sentations for long volumetric videos. For instance, prior work [12] models long volumetric videos using temporal Gaussian hierarchies to reduce the high memory cost of ex-tended sequences. Although effective for offline long-sequence representation, such methods require access to the entire video during optimization and are therefore unsuitable for streamable reconstruction. The second direction mitigates long-term drift by partitioning the full video into multiple GOP and restarting temporal modeling within each segment [47], [50]–[53]. While this strategy can partially alleviate error accumulation by periodically resetting temporal dependencies, it introduces IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 4NG

> BTC
> Vanished
> anchors

Anchor 

## 𝐀 

## 𝐀 Feature 

Position 

𝐀 

Gaussians 

> NG

Gaussian Generation 

Training 

Frozen 

> z

Δ𝐀 Δ𝐀 

> Vanished
> anchors
> BTC

𝐀 1 𝐀 1 

> NG
> Active anchors

## Frame 0 Frame 1 … Frame T 

> Active anchors

A

ANG BTC Nm BTC Nm NG

𝐀 0 𝐀 0

𝐀 𝐀 −1 𝐀 𝐀 −1

Δ𝐀 Δ𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 𝐀 

Recalibration 

BTC Training 

Nm

Nm

𝐀 0 𝐀 0

…

> BTC
> NG

𝐀                                      

> z
> Retain
> Sum
> 𝐀 0𝐀 0𝐀 𝐀 −1𝐀 𝐀 −1
> Fig. 2. Overview of the SoLAR framework. (a) Dynamic Anchors. Free-Viewpoint Video is represented by dynamic anchors Aacross timesteps. NG
> decodes Gaussians from anchor position xand feature f. At timestep t, BTC predicts ∆xand ∆ffrom xt−1, with its lightweight parameters encoded for transmission. (b) Anchor Activation Dynamics. Nmgenerates a probability mask to split anchors into active Aand vanished V(vanished anchors are masked out), with optimized Nmas the transmission payload. (c) Latent Discrepancy Aware Recalibration. After BTC optimization, recalibration is triggered if accumulated gradient Gexceeds the threshold: NGis fine-tuned (anchor features fixed), and the updated NGis transmitted.

substantial time and storage overhead. As a result, GOP-based approaches degrade real-time performance and overall RD ef-ficiency, making them less suitable for low-latency immersive streaming systems. In contrast, our work aims to mitigate error propagation and maintain stable reconstruction quality for long-horizon volumetric videos under streaming constraints. Rather than partitioning the full sequence into multiple GOP, we instead pursue stable streamable reconstruction on LFVV in a fully GOP-free manner. To the best of our knowledge, this work presents the first error-resilient streamable FVV framework that maintains stable reconstruction performance for LFVV without relying on GOP partitioning. III. P RELIMINARIES 

3D Gaussian Splatting. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [18], [19] enables real-time free-viewpoint rendering by represent-ing a scene as a set of explicit 3D Gaussian primitives and rendering them through differentiable splatting with tile-based rasterization. Compared with implicit neural representations, 3DGS provides an efficient and editable scene representation, where geometry and appearance are directly encoded by a collection of Gaussian primitives. Let G = {Gi}Ni=1 denote the Gaussian set, where each Gaussian is parameterized as: 

Gi = ( μi, si, ri, ci, α i), (1) with μi ∈ R3, si ∈ R3, ri ∈ R4, ci, and αi ∈ R denoting the position, scale, rotation, appearance parameters, and opacity of the i-th Gaussian, respectively [18], [31]. 

Rendering. Given a camera pose, each Gaussian is projected onto the image plane as a 2D ellipse and rasterized in a tile-based manner [18], [19]. The rendered color at pixel p is computed via depth-aware alpha compositing: 

C(p) = X

> i∈N

ci wi(p)

> i−1

Y

> j=1

 1 − wj (p), (2) where N denotes the set of depth-sorted Gaussians contribut-ing to pixel p, and wi(p) = αi gi(p) denotes the contribution weight of the i-th Gaussian. The term gi(p) denotes the value of the projected 2D Gaussian at pixel p in screen space: 

gi(p) = exp 



− 12 (p − μ′

> i

)⊤(Σ′

> i

)−1(p − μ′

> i

)



. (3) Here, μ′ 

> i

represents the projected 2D center of the i-th Gaussian, and Σ′ 

> i

denotes the corresponding 2D covariance matrix obtained from the 3D covariance Σi through the pro-jection Jacobian [18], [19]. Because the rasterization process is differentiable [54], all Gaussian parameters can be optimized end-to-end under the rendering objective [18]: 

Lr = (1 − λSSIM )L1 + λSSIM LSSIM . (4) IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Overview 

An overview of the SoLAR framework is presented in Fig. 2, and the inter-frame transformation procedure is sum-marized in Algorithm 1. Given a multi-view video of length 

N , SoLAR performs on-the-fly FVV construction and com-pression in a frame-wise manner. Within this framework, each frame Ft is represented using Dynamic Anchors (Sec. IV-B). The complete scene representation is first optimized for the intra frame (I-frame), denoted by F0. For each subse-quent predictive frame (P-frame) Ft, an efficient inter-frame IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 5

transformation is applied to evolve the representation of the previous frame Ft−1 into Ft. Specifically, a compact BTC is introduced to model anchor transformations between adjacent frames, thereby reducing temporal redundancy. During the optimization of Ft, Anchor Activation Dynamics is employed to dynamically activate informative anchors while suppressing redundant ones (Sec. IV-C). Furthermore, when pronounced discrepancies emerge in the latent representation, Latent Dis-crepancy Aware Recalibration is applied to recalibrate Ft and mitigate error propagation (Sec. IV-D). Finally, to achieve fa-vorable rate-distortion performance, the entire training proce-dure is formulated as a joint optimization problem over model size (rate) and reconstruction quality (distortion) (Sec. IV-E). 

B. Dynamic Anchors 

In the proposed dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video representation framework, FVV is represented by a set of dy-namic anchors A that evolve over time. To model the temporal evolution of anchors in a compact yet expressive manner, we employ BTC to capture frame-to-frame anchor variation, and further apply the pruning strategy proposed in [55] to BTC to maintain model compactness. Each anchor is parameterized by a spatial location x ∈ R3, a latent feature vector f ∈ RD ,and an anchor scaling factor l ∈ R3. To generate k Gaussians from each anchor, the Gaussian attribute network NG learns a mapping from f to the Gaussian attributes A [9], [31]: 

{oi, c i, r i, s i, α i}k−1 

> i=0

= NG(f, −→

d c), (5) 

{μi}k−1 

> i=0

= x + {oi}k−1 

> i=0

· l, (6) where −→

d c denotes the viewing direction, and oi ∈ R3, ci ∈

R3, ri ∈ R4, si ∈ R3, αi ∈ R, and μi ∈ R3 denote the offset, color, rotation quaternion, scale, opacity, and location of the 

i-th Gaussian, respectively. The attributes of the i-th Gaussian are defined as Ai = {μi, c i, r i, s i, α i} [9], [18], [31]. At timestep t, BTC propagates the anchor state from the previous timestep by jointly modeling the spatial evolution and latent feature variation of each anchor [9]. Instead of storing dense frame-specific parameters for all Gaussians, BTC maintains a compact transformation representation that operates directly in the anchor domain. This design preserves the compactness of the anchor-based representation while enabling temporally evolving geometry and appearance to be captured through lightweight anchor-level updates. Specifically, BTC first extracts a compact transformation representation from the predecessor anchor state. Based on this shared transformation context, anchor-BTC BTC x jointly predicts a spatial update together with two scaling coefficients, while feature-BTC BTC f predicts the feature residual. In addition to the update itself, we explicitly introduce scaling prediction to account for the magnitude variation of neural network outputs. This allows the predicted updates to be adaptively rescaled before being applied, thereby improving the stability and flexibility of the transformation modeling: 

[∆˜ xt, γ xt , γ ft ] = BTC x(xt−1), (7) 

∆ ˜ft = BTC f (xt−1), (8) where ∆˜ xt ∈ R3 and ∆ ˜ft ∈ RD denote the candidate motion update and feature residual, respectively, and γxt , γ ft ∈ R

denote the corresponding learned scaling factors. The final anchor updates are then obtained via scale modulation: 

∆xt = γxt · ∆˜ xt, xt = xt−1 + ∆ xt, (9) 

∆ft = γft · ∆ ˜ft, ft = ft−1 + ∆ ft. (10) This formulation offers two key benefits. First, anchor-BTC predicts the spatial update and both scaling factors jointly, allowing a shared transformation context to coordi-nate geometric evolution and feature adaptation in a more unified manner. Second, by decomposing anchor evolution into a residual component and a learned scale term, BTC can adaptively modulate the magnitude of both motion and feature updates according to local dynamic complexity. As a result, the proposed dynamic anchor modeling mechanism enhances temporal adaptability under heterogeneous non-rigid dynamics while preserving the compactness and scalability required for long-horizon streamable free-viewpoint video reconstruction. 

C. Anchor Activation Dynamics 

Although BTC effectively models coordinate shifts, it as-sumes an anchor set with fixed cardinality, which limits its adaptability under topological changes , such as the occlusion of previously visible objects or the emergence of new con-tent [8], [56], [57]. Under such dynamics, retaining all anchors is suboptimal: some anchors may cease to correspond to informative scene regions, while newly important regions may require additional representational support [29], [30], [58]. To overcome this limitation, we introduce Anchor Activation Dynamics , a mechanism that endows the anchor set with frame-adaptive selectivity by preserving informative anchors and suppressing redundant ones. Specifically, for each anchor with latent feature f and spatial location x, the anchor mask network Nm predicts a scalar significance score mx ∈ R,which is converted into a gating variable that modulates the scale and opacity attributes of the associated Gaussians: 

mx = Nm(f, x ), (11) 

Mx = SG( I[σ(mx) > ϵ m] − σ(mx)) + σ(mx), (12) 

{ˆsi, ˆαi}k−1 

> i=0

= Mx · { si, α i}k−1 

> i=0

, (13) where ϵm denotes the mask threshold, SG( ·) denotes the stop-gradient operator [59], I[·] denotes the indicator function, and σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function. Through this gating operation, low-significance anchors are attenuated toward zero contribution, whereas high-significance anchors preserve their geometric attributes. The formulation employs the Straight-Through Estimator, so that anchor activation follows a thresh-olded binary decision in the forward pass while remaining dif-ferentiable through the sigmoid branch in the backward pass, thereby enabling end-to-end learning of the mask network. 

Activation Dynamics. A key aspect of this design is that anchor activation is updated at every timestep, allowing anchor states to evolve with scene topology instead of being fixed once initialized. During optimization, all anchors are refined jointly, enabling the learned mask scores to separate anchors IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 6

that remain structurally relevant from those that have become uninformative. According to these scores, anchors are parti-tioned into active anchors A and vanished anchors V:

A = {Ai | σ(mx) ∈ (ϵm, 1] ∧ i ∈ [1 , |A|]}, (14) 

V = {Ai | σ(mx) ∈ [0 , ϵ m] ∧ i ∈ [1 , |A|]}. (15) During rendering, anchors in V are frozen and masked out, while anchors in A remain active for final image formation. This selective update strategy concentrates representational capacity on anchors that remain topologically relevant to the current frame, while avoiding unnecessary updates to anchors that no longer correspond to meaningful scene content. After optimization, the weights of Nm are encoded and transmitted as a warm-start initialization for the next frame. Since ad-jacent frames typically share substantial scene structure, this initialization naturally encourages temporally coherent anchor activation across frames and provides a more stable starting point for subsequent optimization. 

D. Latent Discrepancy Aware Recalibration 

iFVC [9] employs a shared Gaussian attribute network 

NG for all P-frames Ft. This network is trained at timestep 

0 and remains fixed throughout the sequence. Conceptually, training NG induces a mapping K : f 7 → A from the anchor latent feature space to the Gaussian attribute space, such that each frame relies on its own latent feature f to decode A. While this static design is highly storage-efficient, it implicitly assumes that the latent features of later frames remain compatible with the feature-to-attribute correspondence learned at the initial timestep. In practice, this assumption becomes increasingly fragile, as anchor latent features evolve with changes in scene content, viewpoint, and motion over time. Consequently, the fixed mapping K encoded in NG can become progressively mismatched to the time-varying query features, leading to increasingly unreliable Gaussian attribute prediction. This mismatch is particularly detrimental in predic-tive streaming, where errors at the current frame directly affect the representation quality of subsequent frames. Once the decoded Gaussian attributes deviate from the latent represen-tation at timestep t, the resulting prediction bias can propagate forward and progressively degrade later-frame reconstruction. Consequently, even modest discrepancies introduced at early stages may accumulate over time and ultimately lead to severe degradation in long-horizon video scenarios. A straightforward way to alleviate this mismatch is to update the mapping K for each frame, allowing the Gaussian attribute network to adapt to the latent feature distribution at the current timestep. However, directly reconstructing or updating NG

in a frame-wise manner would introduce substantial storage overhead, since the frame-specific network updates must also be stored and transmitted to the decoder. Therefore, although such updates may reduce the discrepancy between latent features and Gaussian attributes, the additional parameter cost would compromise the overall rate-distortion efficiency. To address this trade-off, we propose Latent Discrepancy Aware Recalibration (LaDAR), which aims to adapt the learned feature-to-attribute correspondence without relying on explicit frame-wise updates of NG. Specifically, LaDAR identifies the discrepancy between the evolving latent feature f and the correspondence K encoded in the fixed Gaussian attribute network NG. In this way, the decoded Gaussian attributes can remain consistently aligned with the current latent represen-tation, thereby mitigating temporal mismatch and suppressing error accumulation in predictive streaming. Motivated by the bit allocation theory in traditional video coding [14], which achieves optimal RD performance by allocating more bitrate to critical frames, we first establish a theoretical foundation for RD optimization under rate-control constraints, and then apply this to dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video represen-tations. For conciseness, the main results are presented below, with the full derivation deferred to the supplementary material. 

Proposition IV.1. To achieve global RD optimality, more critical frames should be allocated lower distortion levels. 

A frame is considered more critical if its reconstruction quality exerts a stronger influence on subsequent frames. We refer to this downstream influence as the temporal impor-tance of the frame. In our dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video representation, we quantify temporal importance through discrepancy propagation. Specifically, the discrepancy-based temporal importance of each frame is defined as follows: 

Definition IV.2 (Discrepancy-based Importance) .

θt =

∂

PNi=t+1 Di



∂Dt

, (16) where Dt denotes the discrepancy between f and NG at timestep t, and θt quantifies the importance of Ft. Specifically, 

θt measures how a perturbation in the discrepancy at frame t

affects the cumulative discrepancy of future frames. A larger θt

thus indicates that the current frame exerts a stronger temporal influence, meaning that reducing its discrepancy leads to a greater downstream reduction in sequence-level distortion. Although this definition provides a principled characteri-zation of frame importance, directly estimating the influence of the current frame on all subsequent frames is computa-tionally intractable in a streaming setting. Exact evaluation would require tracking how the discrepancy at the current frame propagates through all future frames, while such future information is unavailable at the current timestep under the on-the-fly streaming paradigm [8], [9]. To address this limitation, we introduce a tractable online surrogate based on the gradient information generated during the BTC-based transformation of the latent feature f . The effectiveness of this gradient-based surrogate is empirically validated in Sec. V-E. The key intuition is that, when the transformed latent feature becomes increasingly mismatched with the fixed correspondence, op-timizing BTC f requires stronger corrective updates, which are reflected by larger gradients during BTC-based feature transformation. Therefore, the gradient signal serves as an efficient discrepancy indicator: larger gradients suggest a more pronounced mismatch between f and NG, which may degrade Gaussian prediction and exacerbate error accumulation. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 7

To improve the robustness of the gradient-based discrepancy indicator, we maintain an exponential moving average (EMA) of the gradients associated with BTC f . This design sup-presses short-term fluctuations caused by stochastic viewpoint selection while retaining the underlying optimization tendency. As a result, it provides a reliable estimate of the discrepancy state near convergence. Specifically, the EMA statistic G is updated with a smoothing coefficient αD set to 0.3 by default: 

Gi = αD · G i−1 + (1 − αD ) · gi, i = 1 , . . . , T BTC , (17) where gi and Gi denote the gradient of BTC f and its exponential moving average at step i, respectively, and TBTC 

denotes the total number of training steps for BTC. The resulting statistic GTBTC therefore serves as a compact indicator of the underlying latent discrepancy. 

Recalibration. After the BTC training phase, recalibration of NG is activated only when the final gradient statistic 

GTBTC exceeds a predefined discrepancy threshold ϵD . This event-driven criterion prevents unnecessary network updates and ensures that recalibration is performed only when the observed discrepancy is sufficiently large to suggest that the fixed correspondence K is no longer well aligned with the current latent distribution. During recalibration, NG is fine-tuned while the anchor features are kept frozen. This design explicitly updates the correspondence K encoded in NG, rather than re-optimizing the latent representation already learned for the current frame. The recalibrated NG is then stored and transmitted to the decoder, enabling subsequent frames to decode Gaussian attributes with an updated network that better matches the evolving feature distribution. Since recalibration is selectively invoked and NG is compact, this procedure intro-duces only limited computational and transmission overhead, thereby preserving the storage efficiency of the framework. 

E. Sparse-Aware RD Optimization 

To jointly balance reconstruction quality, coding efficiency, and anchor compactness at time t, we formulate the training objective L(t) as a weighted combination of three complemen-tary terms: the rendering loss L(t) 

> r

, the entropy loss L(t) 

> e

, and the sparsity loss L(t) 

> s

:

L(t) = L(t) 

> r

+ λeL(t) 

> e

+ λsL(t) 

> s

, (18) where λe and λs are trade-off coefficients. Specifically, L(t)

> r

enforces rendering accuracy, L(t) 

> e

constrains the number of transmitted bits, and L(t) 

> s

encourages a more compact anchor configuration. By optimizing these terms jointly, sparse anchor selection is incorporated directly into the RD objective itself, rather than imposed afterward as a separate post hoc constraint. The rendering loss [9] is defined as: 

L(t) 

> r

= (1 − λSSIM )L1 + λSSIM LSSIM , (19) where L1 denotes the pixel-wise ℓ1 loss, LSSIM represents the structural similarity loss, and λSSIM balances the contribution of the structural similarity term, which is set to 0.2 by default. For the entropy term, we follow prior work [9] and estimate the bit consumption of BTC from the occurrence probability 

Algorithm 1 Inter-frame Transformation Procedure of SoLAR 

Input: It, At−1, Nt−1 

> m

, NG, random initialization ∆,rasterizer R

Output: At, Ntm, BTC x, BTC f , NG

Hyperparameters: TBTC , TR,αD , ϵD ,ϵm,λe,λs 

> 1:

Initialize At ← At−1, BTC x, BTC f ← ∆, Ntm ←

Nt−1 

> m

or ∆, and G0 ← 0 

> 2:

for i = 1 to TBTC do  

> 3:

[∆˜ xt, γ xt , γ ft ] = BTC x(xt−1), ∆ ˜ft = BTC f (xt−1) 

> 4:

∆xt = γxt · ∆˜ xt, xt = xt−1 + ∆ xt, 

> 5:

∆ft = γft · ∆ ˜ft, ft = ft−1 + ∆ ft 

> 6:

A ← NG(ft, −→

d c), m ← Ntm(xt, f t) 

> 7:

M ← SG( I[σ(m) > ϵ m] − σ(m)) + σ(m) 

> 8:

I′ 

> t

← R(M · A ) 

> 9:

L(t) ← L (t) 

> r

+ λeL(t) 

> e

+ λsL(t) 

> s
> 10:

gi = ∇BTC f L(t) 

> 2
> 11:

Gi ← αD Gi−1 + (1 − αD )gi 

> 12:

Update BTC x, BTC f , Ntm 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

if GTBTC > ϵ D then  

> 15:

for i = 1 to TR do  

> 16:

Render with (xt, f t, Ntm, NG), compute L(t) 

> r
> 17:

Update NG 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

return At, Ntm, BTC x, BTC f , NG

pB of the binary symbol +1 . Specifically, the generated BTC symbols are modeled with a Bernoulli distribution, under which an observed +1 incurs a code length of − log 2(pB )

and an observed −1 incurs − log 2(1 − pB ). The entropy loss at time t is therefore defined as: 

L(t) 

> e

= C+ × (− log 2(pB )) + C− × (− log 2(1 − pB )) , (20) where C+ and C− denote the total counts of symbols +1 and 

−1, respectively. To further encourage compactness, we introduce a sparsity-aware regularization term: 

L(t) 

> s

= 1

NaNaX

> n=1

σ(mn), Na = |A|, (21) where Na is the total number of anchors. Instead of penalizing hard binary decisions, this term operates on the mean soft activation of anchors, which preserves compatibility with gradient-based optimization. By suppressing unnecessarily high activation scores, it steers the model toward using fewer active anchors, thereby promoting a compact representation while retaining anchors that remain beneficial for rendering. V. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experiment Setup 

Datasets. Experiments are conducted on four representative and widely used real-world dynamic scene datasets: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 8

TABLE I 

QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON ON MEETING ROOM AND N3DV DATASETS . A DASH (–) INDICATES THAT THE CORRESPONDING METRIC IS NOT REPORTED IN THE ORIGINAL WORK . SOLAR-LITE DENOTES THE LIGHTWEIGHT VERSION OF SOLAR .

Category Method Meeting Room N3DV PSNR(dB) ↑ SSIM ↑ Storage(MB) ↓ Render(FPS) ↑ PSNR(dB) ↑ SSIM ↑ Storage(MB) ↓ Render(FPS) ↑

Offline Swift4D (ICLR 2025) 32.05 – 0.13 – 32.23 – 0.40 125 SplineGS (ICLR 2025) – – – – 32.60 0.950 – 76 Online 3DGStream (CVPR 2024) 29.30 – 4.10 260 31.35 0.948 7.80 245 4DGC (CVPR 2025) 28.08 0.922 0.42 213 31.58 0.943 0.50 168 4DGCPro (NeurIPS 2025) – – – – 31.64 0.944 0.64 –ComGS-l (NeurIPS 2025) – – – – 32.12 – 0.11 147 iFVC (AAAI 2025) 32.38 – 0.09 157 32.32 – 0.09 126 QUEEN-l (NeurIPS 2024) – – – – 32.19 0.946 0.75 248 D-FCGS (AAAI 2026) 30.97 0.950 0.09 288 32.02 0.951 0.18 215 HiCoM (NeurIPS 2024) 26.73 – 0.60 284 32.08 0.953 0.69 255 Recon-GS (NeurIPS 2025) 30.84 – 0.30 256 32.66 0.957 0.44 250 

SoLAR (Ours) 33.62 0.962 0.05 127 33.43 0.954 0.06 160 

SoLAR-lite (Ours) 33.04 0.958 0.02 182 32.93 0.951 0.03 163 

TABLE II 

QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON ON BAR . † DENOTES GOP PARTITIONING .                                                   

> Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓Storage ↓Train ↓Render ↑
> (dB) (MB) (min) (FPS) 3DGStream 26.78 0.853 0.162 3.80 1.127 114 4DGC 28.11 0.800 0.167 1.22 0.867 156 HiCoM 23.24 0.676 0.380 0.89 0.879 163 Recon-GS 27.43 0.803 0.250 0.32 0.936 176 iFVC 28.03 0.842 0.194 0.42 0.906 213 iFVC †28.13 0.852 0.183 0.42 1.134 176
> SoLAR 32.45 0.893 0.145 0.05 0.852 180

TABLE III 

QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON ON AVATAR REX -LBN 1.                                     

> Method PSNR(dB) ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓Storage(MB) ↓Render(FPS) ↑
> 3DGStream 28.11 0.935 0.081 3.80 321 4DGC 24.53 0.885 0.110 1.41 166 HiCoM 25.74 0.864 0.094 0.10 371 Recon-GS 24.48 0.889 0.102 0.08 184 iFVC 27.32 0.938 0.089 0.10 201
> SoLAR 32.28 0.965 0.067 0.05 346
> •

Neural 3D Video dataset (N3DV) [2] comprises 6 dy-namic scenes. Each scene contains 18 to 21 multi-view videos, with each video spanning 300 frames captured at a resolution of 2704 × 2028 . Following prior works [8], [9], [60], we downsample the videos by a factor of two.  

> •

Meeting Room dataset (Meeting Room) [3] consists of three dynamic scenes from diverse real-world environ-ments. Each scene is recorded by 13 synchronized multi-view videos, with each video spanning 300 frames cap-tured at a resolution of 1280 × 720 . 

> •

Bar dataset (Bar) [12] consists of high-resolution video recordings captured at 60 FPS in 4K using a synchronized array of 22 cameras, containing over 3,000 frames. This dataset is particularly challenging due to its long duration and the large magnitude of scene motion.  

> •

AvatarRex dataset (AvatarRex) [61] comprises three multi-view video sequences captured with a synchronized array of 16 well-calibrated RGB cameras at 30 FPS. Each sequence is recorded at a resolution of 1500 × 2048 , with lengths ranging from 1,800 to 2,000 frames. 

TABLE IV 

QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON ON AVATAR REX -LBN 2.                                    

> Method PSNR(dB) ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓Storage(MB) ↓Render(FPS) ↑
> 3DGStream 24.97 0.906 0.090 3.80 289 4DGC 21.48 0.858 0.120 1.41 196 HiCoM 23.49 0.853 0.098 0.12 383 Recon-GS 22.51 0.828 0.135 0.10 203 iFVC 26.06 0.930 0.080 0.09 344
> SoLAR 27.46 0.928 0.071 0.08 228

TABLE V 

QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON ON AVATAR REX -ZXC .                                   

> Method PSNR(dB) ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓Storage(MB) ↓Render(FPS) ↑
> 3DGStream 23.17 0.895 0.104 3.80 222 4DGC 20.66 0.837 0.133 1.40 167 HiCoM 20.67 0.756 0.132 0.17 276 Recon-GS 20.65 0.791 0.126 0.10 146 iFVC 24.06 0.928 0.091 0.07 101
> SoLAR 27.63 0.947 0.078 0.06 326

To ensure a fair comparison, we follow prior work [8]–[11], [36] by holding out one viewpoint for testing and using the remaining viewpoints for training. 

Baselines. We compare SoLAR against a set of recent and representative state-of-the-art methods, covering both of-fline and online approaches. The offline baselines include Swift4D [60] and SplineGS [62], while the online base-lines include 3DGStream [8], iFVC [9], Recon-GS [11], QUEEN [63], D-FCGS [64], 4DGCPro [4], ComGS [50], 4DGC [65], and HiCoM [10]. For each dataset, we follow a consistent comparison protocol. Specifically, we use the results reported in the original papers when they are available for the same dataset. When such results are unavailable, we reproduce the corresponding methods using their publicly released code under the same experimental settings. If a method provides neither reported results nor a public implementation for a given dataset, we leave the corresponding entries blank. 

Metrics. To evaluate different methods, we report commonly used metrics, including PSNR (dB), SSIM [66], LPIPS [67], storage (MB), training time (min), and rendering speed (FPS). IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 9       

> Ground truth 3DGStream 4DGC HiCoM iFVC SoLAR
> Fig. 3. Qualitative comparison. SoLAR consistently reconstructs finer details and delivers the best visual quality across all evaluated datasets.

All metrics are averaged over the entire sequence. Experiments are repeated over multiple runs to ensure statistical reliability. 

Implementation Details. The default settings are described as follows. The framework begins with sparse points recon-structed by Structure-from-Motion (SfM) at timestep 0. We train frame F0 for 15K steps using a context model [32] to compress anchor attributes. For each subsequent frame Ft, we train BTC for 500 steps. The thresholds ϵm and ϵD are set to 0.01 and 0.002, respectively. The weight parameters λe and 

λs are set to 0.004 and 0.01, respectively. The implementation of BTC and NG follows prior work [9]. After BTC training, if recalibration is required, an additional 200 fine-tuning steps are applied to NG. We use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 5 × 10 −3. Experiments are conducted on an NVIDIA RTX L20 GPU. We also implement a lightweight variant, denoted as SoLAR-lite , by reducing the size of BTC and NG.

B. Experiment Results 

Quantitative Results. Our proposed method SoLAR consis-tently achieves the best reconstruction quality while requiring the least storage across all evaluated datasets. Meanwhile, it maintains training and rendering speeds comparable to existing approaches, demonstrating a superior rate-distortion trade-off and remarkable computational efficiency. As shown in Tab. I, Tab. II, Tab. III, Tab. IV, and Tab. V, SoLAR consistently improves PSNR over recent state-of-the-art approaches by ap-proximately 1 dB on N3DV, 1.5 dB on Meeting Room, 4 dB on Bar, and 4 dB on AvatarRex-lbn1. Notably, SoLAR-lite further yields a dramatic reduction in storage overhead while still achieving the second-best reconstruction quality, surpassed only by SoLAR . Specifically, on the Meeting Room dataset, 

SoLAR improves reconstruction fidelity by approximately 

3 dB while reducing storage requirements by 6× relative to Recon-GS. Moreover, SoLAR and SoLAR-lite achieve the top two PSNR and SSIM results, while reducing storage consumption by more than 200 × compared with 3DGStream. The superiority of the proposed method is further reflected on the long-horizon Bar dataset, where SoLAR surpasses iFVC by approximately 4 dB and simultaneously reduces storage overhead by 10 ×. Similarly, on the human-centric dataset 

AvatarRex-lbn1 , SoLAR is the only method that sustains a PSNR above 30 dB, while maintaining an average storage IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 10       

> Ground truth 3DGStream 4DGC HiCoM iFVC SoLAR
> Fig. 4. Multi-view consistency comparison . SoLAR delivers more stable and coherent renderings across novel viewpoints.

overhead of merely 0.05 MB. These results demonstrate that 

SoLAR exhibits superior cross-dataset generalization ability and maintains favorable robustness under long-horizon stream-ing scenarios. In particular, the proposed framework effectively mitigates error accumulation in LFVV and maintains stable performance over extended sequences. As shown in Fig. 1, competing methods suffer a clear quality drop after 300– 500 frames, whereas SoLAR remains stable throughout the sequence. Even when mild early-stage degradation occurs, 

SoLAR recovers and suppresses subsequent error propagation, preventing gradual performance decline. This stability comes from the complementary effects of AAD and LaDAR. Specif-ically, AAD improves the modeling of non-rigid transforma-tions, enhancing robustness against errors introduced by tem-poral propagation. Meanwhile, LaDAR identifies and corrects discrepancies in latent representations, effectively limiting their continuous accumulation across frames. Together, these modules mitigate error accumulation without relying on GOP partitioning, resulting in consistently excellent performance across diverse datasets under the considered setting. 

Qualitative Results. Qualitative results further corroborate the effectiveness of SoLAR . As shown in Fig. 1, on the Bar 

dataset, as the sequence progresses and the object undergoes rapid, large-amplitude motion, the competing method iFVC exhibits noticeable rendering degradation, including increas-ingly blurred outputs, loss of fine object details, and progres-sive deterioration in visual fidelity. By contrast, SoLAR main-tains stable reconstruction quality throughout the sequence. This performance gap becomes even more striking when the object is temporarily occluded or disappears from view. Base-line methods exhibit noticeable failure cases, where the ren-dered appearance collapses and the object becomes difficult to distinguish, while SoLAR still preserves faithful visual details and superior appearance consistency. Fig. 3 further presents qualitative comparisons between SoLAR and representative baselines, including 3DGStream, 4DGC, HiCoM, and iFVC, across five scenes: Sear Steak , Vrheadset , Trimming , Flame Salmon , and Bar . Across diverse motion patterns and scene dynamics, competing methods struggle to preserve clear local structures and stable appearance, especially in regions with pronounced non-rigid motion. This is mainly caused by limited capacity for complex motion modeling and accumulated errors during long-horizon temporal propagation, which progres-sively degrade later-frame rendering. In contrast, SoLAR ad-dresses these limitations through the complementary effects of AAD and LaDAR, preserving finer details, clearer structures, and more stable appearance throughout the sequence. This ad-vantage is prominently observed in the final frame of Bar (final row), where the person places the instrument down. Under this challenging motion scenario, all baseline methods produce severely blurred renderings with distorted geometric structures and substantial loss of fine details; some methods even suffer from complete rendering failure and unnatural visual artifacts. By contrast, SoLAR achieves higher visual fidelity and more faithful recovery of local structures, remaining consistently closer to the ground truth than all competing approaches. Taken together, these qualitative comparisons show that So-LAR provides more faithful long-horizon reconstruction, with stronger detail preservation, higher visual fidelity, and more stable temporal behavior throughout the sequence. 

Multi-view consistency. To evaluate the robustness of multi-view consistency, we further conduct qualitative comparisons IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 11                                              

> TABLE VI
> ABLATION STUDY OF KEY MODULES IN SOLAR. METHOD WITH †
> ENABLES GOP PARTITIONING .
> Method PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓Storage ↓Train ↓Render ↑
> (dB) (MB) (min) (FPS) w/o AAD 32.34 0.147 0.07 0.826 231 w/o LaDAR 32.22 0.147 0.06 0.851 176 w/o AAD & LaDAR 31.92 0.151 0.20 0.820 206 w/o AAD & LaDAR †32.03 0.150 0.20 0.834 205 SoLAR (full) 32.45 0.145 0.05 0.852 180 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500

Frame       

> 31.8
> 32.0
> 32.2
> 32.4
> 32.6
> 32.8
> 33.0
> PSNR
> SoLAR
> w/o AAD
> w/o LaDAR
> w/o AAD&LaDAR
> w/o AAD&LaDAR †
> 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
> 30.5
> 31.0
> 31.5
> Fig. 5. Reconstruction quality trends across SoLAR ablation variants.
> Variants incorporating GOP partitioning are marked with †.

under varying camera viewpoints. As shown in Fig. 4, the 

Cook Spinach scene contains challenging contact-intensive regions, where baseline methods often fail to maintain stable geometry and appearance across viewpoints. In the enlarged comparisons, they produce blurred contours and unstable con-tact geometry between the hand and tongs, over-smoothed and view-dependent distortions for the vegetables, and unnatural changes in the relative position between the tongs and wok rim. These failure cases primarily arise from the limited capacity of the competing methods to model dynamic scenes involving fine-grained non-rigid contact. By contrast, SoLAR 

effectively alleviates these limitations. In the enlarged views, it preserves clearer local geometry, more coherent motion patterns, and more stable cross-view spatial organization in contact-intensive regions. In particular, the relative position between the tongs and the wok rim remains consistent across viewpoints. The grasping configuration between the hand and the tongs is preserved more coherently. Meanwhile, the vegetables inside the wok retain a more stable distribution and appearance. Overall, SoLAR yields cleaner and more coherent novel-view renderings, better maintains the structural integrity of local interactions, and demonstrates excellent multi-view consistency for free-viewpoint video synthesis under uncon-strained camera motion and continuous view transitions. 

C. Ablation Study 

Since our work targets LFVV reconstruction, we conduct the ablation study on the challenging long-horizon Bar dataset to evaluate the individual contributions of AAD and LaDAR. 

Bar contains more than 3,000 frames and exhibits large-amplitude motion, temporary disappearance of scene content, and substantial long-term temporal variations. These charac-teristics make it a representative setting in which temporal drift and accumulated errors become major sources of degradation. As summarized in Tab. VI and Fig. 5, both modules improve reconstruction quality and reduce storage consumption, while introducing only negligible additional training cost. 

Effectiveness of AAD. AAD improves the overall perfor-mance of SoLAR by enhancing the modeling capacity of dynamic anchors for non-rigid transformations. Specifically, it employs a soft masking mechanism to dynamically activate informative anchors and suppress less relevant ones. Unlike permanent pruning, anchors suppressed by the mask at the current timestamp are not removed from the representation and can be reactivated in subsequent frames. This temporal reversibility provides a flexible and adaptive representation, enabling the model to accommodate evolving scene con-tent, including newly appearing objects and complex local motion, without introducing additional anchors. The quan-titative results in Tab. VI confirm the effectiveness of this design. Compared with the variant without both AAD and LaDAR, introducing AAD improves PSNR by approximately 0.3 dB. More importantly, the storage overhead is reduced from 0.20 MB to 0.06 MB, corresponding to a more than 3×

reduction. These results indicate that AAD not only improves reconstruction fidelity, but also leads to a more compact BTC representation, demonstrating its effectiveness in improving both scene compactness and representational capacity. 

Effectiveness of LaDAR. LaDAR is designed to recalibrate the Gaussian attribute network NG while keeping the anchor features fixed. Accordingly, LaDAR updates the mapping from anchor latent features to Gaussian attributes by fine-tuning 

NG without altering the anchor representation itself. This mechanism enables the decoded Gaussian attributes to remain better aligned with the current latent representation, thereby suppressing temporal discrepancies that would otherwise prop-agate to subsequent frames. As shown in Tab. VI, compared with the variant without both AAD and LaDAR, introducing LaDAR improves reconstruction quality by approximately 0.4 dB, while reducing the storage overhead from 0.20 MB to 0.07 MB, demonstrating that LaDAR suppresses temporal representation drift and preserves compactness. Moreover, removing LaDAR results in a noticeable drop in rendering speed, indicating that aligning the decoded Gaussian attributes with the current latent representation can further accelerate rendering. Overall, these results demonstrate that the introduc-tion of LaDAR delivers superior performance and effectively mitigates error propagation, while sustaining compact storage overhead and practical rendering efficiency. 

Detailed Comparison with iFVC. We observe that even after disabling the AAD and LaDAR (denoted as w/o AAD & LaDAR), the proposed framework still outperforms iFVC on the long-horizon Bar dataset. This superiority stems from their different dynamic-anchor formulations. iFVC keeps anchor positions fixed during inter-frame transformations and only updates anchor features, whereas SoLAR jointly transforms both anchor positions and features across frames. This joint IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 12 

transformation provides SoLAR with a more flexible temporal representation, enabling it to better capture scene variations and improve robustness in long-sequence video reconstruction. 

Storage Analysis. To provide a more fine-grained analysis of the model storage cost, we examine the module-wise overhead of AAD and LaDAR and their impact on representation com-pactness. Instead of assigning separate learnable parameters to each anchor, AAD uses a compact anchor mask network Nm

to implicitly encode activation patterns, introducing only about 

0.0026 MB overhead per frame. When severe discrepancies arise between the anchor latent features f and the Gaussian attribute network NG, the correspondence K encoded in NG is recalibrated. The updated NG is then stored and propagated to subsequent frames. Benefiting from the compact architecture of NG, this recalibration process introduces only limited storage and transmission overhead, requiring approximately 

0.03 MB. In addition, extensive experiments indicate a clear storage characteristic: the storage cost tends to increase in more challenging temporal reconstruction scenarios, where more complex motion and appearance variations must be modeled. For example, in the last 200 frames of Bar , the storage cost increases from 0.05 MB to 0.18 MB per frame even with LaDAR enabled. This behavior can be attributed to the BTC network, which is responsible for modeling inter-frame feature transformations. Under severe motion variations, the BTC network needs to encode more intricate temporal transformation patterns, resulting in more complex network parameters and substantially higher storage consumption. 

Rendering Speed. In terms of rendering efficiency, although the full SoLAR does not achieve the highest rendering speed, it remains competitive with existing methods, as shown in Tab. I. This trade-off mainly comes from the anchor-based rep-resentation, which requires an additional decoding step to de-rive Gaussian attributes from anchors, unlike explicit Gaussian methods that directly rasterize available primitives. Besides, AAD incurs additional cost during rendering because dynamic suppression requires evaluating the anchor mask network Nm.Nevertheless, SoLAR maintains favorable efficiency partly due to LaDAR. By correcting latent discrepancies, LaDAR improves the alignment between the Gaussian attribute net-work NG and time-varying anchor features, making Gaussian attribute decoding more stable and efficient. It also reduces the burden on BTC, allowing it to focus on actual temporal transformations rather than accumulated discrepancies. As a result, the model can capture frame-to-frame variations more efficiently, which facilitates Gaussian attribute decoding and contributes to improved rendering speed during training. 

Training Speed. As reported in Tab. II, the proposed method achieves the shortest training time among recent state-of-the-art approaches. To further analyze the training cost, we decompose the runtime of different components in Tab. VI. Although AAD and LaDAR introduce additional computation, their overhead remains marginal even on the long-sequence 

Bar dataset. Specifically, AAD introduces extra mask com-putation and may reduce rendering FPS, but it improves compactness and reconstruction quality by suppressing less 275 350 425                   

> 31.0
> 31.5
> 32.0
> 32.5
> 33.0
> PSNR
> 1575 1650 1725 3284 3368 3452
> SoLAR (full)
> w/o AAD ( = 0.003)
> w/o AAD ( = 0.002)
> w/o AAD ( = 0.0015)
> Frame
> (a) Reconstruction quality 275 350 425
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> 160
> 180
> Storage (KB)
> 1575 1650 1725 3284 3368 3452
> SoLAR (full)
> w/o AAD ( = 0.003)
> w/o AAD ( = 0.002)
> w/o AAD ( = 0.0015)
> Frame
> (b) Storage overhead

Fig. 6. Temporal Dynamics of Reconstruction Quality and Storage Over-head. Adjusting recalibration threshold controls the recalibration frequency. Top: temporal reconstruction quality. Bottom: temporal storage overhead. 

relevant anchors, adding only 0.03 minutes of training time compared with the variant without both AAD and LaDAR. LaDAR also introduces only about 0.006 minutes of overhead, since recalibration is triggered infrequently over the sequence. 

GOP Partitioning. Notably, GOP partitioning brings only limited performance gains. As shown in Tab. II and Tab. VI, applying GOP partitioning to iFVC and to the variant w/o AAD & LaDAR improves PSNR by only about 0.1 dB, while introducing considerable latency overhead. Although periodic resets can partially alleviate long-range error accumulation, they also disrupt inter-frame temporal consistency and intro-duce additional computational delay, thereby reducing real-time efficiency. In contrast, SoLAR mitigates error propaga-tion through AAD and LaDAR within a unified streaming framework, avoiding explicit sequence partitioning while pre-serving both temporal consistency and overall efficiency. 

D. Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis 

We further examine the sensitivity of the key hyperparame-ters in AAD and LaDAR, and additionally analyze the inherent characteristics of these two modules. Quantitative results under different parameter settings are reported in Tab. VII. 

Effect of the Sparsity Weight. After introducing AAD, the training objective includes an additional sparsity regularization term, whose strength is controlled by the sparsity-loss weight 

λs. This term constrains the activation of dynamic anchors during optimization, thereby encouraging the representation to use anchors more selectively. To analyze the influence of this constraint and avoid interference from LaDAR, we disable LaDAR and vary λs. Imposing stronger sparsity reg-ularization encourages the model to mask a larger number of anchors, thereby producing a sparser representation. As shown in Tab. VII, while more aggressive anchor masking (e.g., 

λs = 0 .1) can slightly improve rendering speed by reducing the number of active anchors, it also removes informative com-ponents that are necessary for accurate scene representation, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 13                                                   

> TABLE VII
> EXAMINATION OF KEY HYPERPARAMETERS IN AAD AND LADAR.
> Module Hyperparameter Value PSNR(dB) ↑SSIM ↑Storage(MB) ↓Render(FPS) ↑
> AAD
> λs
> 0.1 31.91 0.888 0.09 180 0.01 32.22 0.895 0.06 176 0.001 32.23 0.897 0.10 156 0.0001 32.26 0.891 0.10 155
> ϵm
> 0.005 32.18 0.889 0.10 156 0.01 32.22 0.895 0.06 176 0.1 32.05 0.887 0.06 166 LaDAR ϵD
> 0.0015 32.39 0.891 0.08 219 0.002 32.34 0.893 0.07 231 0.003 32.28 0.896 0.06 218

leading to a noticeable degradation in reconstruction quality. By contrast, when sparsity is only weakly enforced (e.g., 

λs = 0.0001 ), the regularization becomes insufficient and redundant anchors remain active. Although this setting yields a slight reconstruction fidelity improvement, it also increases storage overhead and reduces rendering speed, resulting in inferior overall efficiency. Based on the above analysis, an appropriate sparsity weight is essential, as it allows AAD to retain sufficient informative anchors for accurate scene model-ing, thereby improving its overall effectiveness. In particular, setting λs = 0 .01 achieves the most favorable trade-off among reconstruction quality, storage efficiency, and rendering speed. 

Effect of the Masking Threshold. In AAD, the masking threshold ϵm determines whether an anchor should be sup-pressed during anchor activation: A larger masking threshold induces more aggressive anchor suppression, resulting in fewer active anchors, while a smaller threshold preserves denser anchor activation. To examine the sensitivity of AAD to the masking threshold, we vary ϵm while disabling LaDAR. Tab. VII reveals clear differences in anchor reservation under varying thresholds. Among the 40,460 anchors, the variant with ϵm = 0 .1 retains 34,506 active anchors, whereas lowering the threshold to ϵm = 0 .01 and ϵm = 0 .005 increases this number to 38,879 and 39,477, respectively. Such noticeable differences in anchor quantity directly affect the overall repre-sentational quality. Specifically, when the threshold is too large (e.g., ϵm = 0 .1), AAD may discard anchors that still contain useful scene information, thereby weakening the expressive capacity of the representation and causing a clear performance drop. When the threshold is relaxed (e.g., ϵm = 0 .005 ), more potentially informative anchors are preserved, resulting in a more complete scene representation. However, the moderate threshold ϵm = 0.01 provides the most favorable operat-ing point, which achieves better reconstruction quality while maintaining lower storage cost and faster rendering speed, indicating that AAD benefits from an appropriately calibrated masking threshold rather than simply retaining more anchors. 

Effect of the Recalibration Threshold. We analyze the in-fluence of the recalibration discrepancy threshold ϵD used in LaDAR. To isolate the effect of ϵD , AAD is disabled and only the recalibration threshold is varied. Quantitative results are reported in Tab. VII, and the quality–storage trade-off is visualized in Fig. 6. The storage spikes correspond to -2 -1 0 1 2 3    

> Gradient statistic 
> -2
> -1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> PSNR
> Pearson's r= -0.9344
> Correlation between Gradient statistic and PSNR
> Fig. 7. Correlation between normalized PSNR and normalized gradient statistic across a 1,000-frame sequence on the Bar dataset.

recalibration events, each introducing about 0.03 MB overhead for the corresponding frame. As expected, a lower ϵD triggers more frequent recalibration: the number of recalibration events is nearly 1,400 for ϵD = 0 .0015 , 539 for ϵD = 0 .002 , and 127 for ϵD = 0 .003 . An overly large threshold delays recalibration until substantial latent discrepancies have accumulated. For example, ϵD = 0.003 leads to a 0.06 dB drop in PSNR compared with ϵD = 0 .002 . Conversely, overly frequent recal-ibration brings limited quality gain but increases storage and computation. Compared with ϵD = 0 .002 , setting ϵD = 0 .0015 

improves PSNR by only 0.05 dB, while increasing storage overhead by about 14.3% and reducing rendering speed. 

E. Evaluation of Gradient-Based Indicator 

In a streaming scenario, explicitly estimating the influence of the current frame on all subsequent frames is compu-tationally prohibitive, since it would require either solving a frame-wise bit-allocation problem or repeatedly evaluating future reconstruction errors. Therefore, instead of directly optimizing a per-frame Lagrange multiplier λi or estimating the future influence parameters, LaDAR adopts a lightweight discrepancy-driven criterion to decide when the Gaussian-attribute network NG should be recalibrated. Specifically, we use the gradient statistic G generated during the BTC transformation of the latent feature f as a streaming-IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 14 

friendly indicator of the discrepancy between the current latent representation and the fixed Gaussian-attribute network NG.The motivation is as follows. During BTC optimization, the gradient magnitude reflects how strongly the current latent fea-ture needs to be adjusted to fit the reconstruction objective. A larger gradient therefore indicates that the current optimization state is less compatible with the existing Gaussian-attribute decoder. In our setting, this incompatibility corresponds to a larger mismatch between the evolving latent feature f and the fixed network NG, which may result in inaccurate Gaussian attributes and subsequently amplify reconstruction errors in later frames. Importantly, G is not intended to be a closed-form solution to the theoretical rate-distortion allocation problem. Instead, it serves as a practical surrogate for latent discrepancy term that is difficult to observe directly in a streaming pipeline. Since the true latent discrepancy between the evolving feature f and the fixed Gaussian-attribute network NG is not directly observable, we evaluate its realized effect through the final rendering quality. The rationale is that a mismatch in the latent space affects the decoded Gaussian attributes, which further influences the reconstruction quality. Therefore, PSNR can be used as a reconstruction-level proxy for the observable consequence of latent discrepancy: a lower PSNR usually indicates that the mismatch between f and NG has produced a more severe degradation in the rendered result. Based on this consideration, we select a representative 1,000-frame sequence from the Bar dataset and record both the PSNR and the corresponding gradient statistic G for each frame. As shown in Fig. 7, PSNR exhibits a strong negative correlation with G, with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 

−0.9344 . This result indicates that larger gradient statistics consistently correspond to lower rendering quality, which reflects greater discrepancy, and supports the use of G as an effective indicator of latent discrepancy in streaming setting. We further emphasize that this correlation analysis is not used as the sole evidence for temporal importance. Rather, it validates whether the proposed gradient statistic can capture the observable effect of latent mismatch. The effectiveness of using this statistic to guide adaptive recalibration is further demonstrated by the quantitative comparisons in Sec. V-B and the ablation studies in Sec. V-C. These results jointly show that the proposed gradient-based indicator can effectively reflect the discrepancy between the evolving latent features and the Gaussian-attribute network, and can provide a reliable criterion for triggering adaptive recalibration in LaDAR. 

F. Rate-Distortion Performance 

To evaluate the flexibility of SoLAR under different storage budgets, we instantiate a series of model variants with different storage overheads by adjusting the capacity of the transform network. This modification changes the representational bud-get of the model while preserving the overall framework, thereby enabling a direct examination of the rate-distortion trade-off. Fig. 8 presents the resulting rate-distortion curves and compares SoLAR with existing SOTA approaches [8], [10], [11], [63], [65], [68] on two scenes. A particularly notable trend appears in the extremely low-bitrate regime. 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08    

> 29
> 30
> 31
> 32
> 33
> PSNR
> 1234
> Storage (MB)
> Ours
> 3DGStream
> HiCoM
> Recon-GS

(a) Discussion 0.0500 0.0502 0.0504 0.0506 0.0508 0.0510 0.0512 0.0514 0.0516   

> 28.5
> 29.0
> 29.5
> 30.0
> 30.5
> 31.0
> PSNR
> 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Storage (MB)
> Ours
> HiCoM
> Recon-GS
> 4DGC
> QUEEN-1
> SaRO-GS

(b) Flame Salmon 

Fig. 8. Rate-distortion performance in two scenarios. The proposed framework achieves a better rate-distortion trade-off than state-of-the-art baselines and provides flexible storage–quality adaptation. TABLE VIII 

STABILITY COMPARISON ACROSS REPEATED RUNS .

iFVC SoLAR Scene μseq ↑ σrun ↓ σtemp ↓ μseq ↑ σrun ↓ σtemp ↓

Cook Spinach 28.29 1.376 0.932 34.75 0.085 0.467 

Flame Salmon 28.54 0.312 0.323 30.74 0.020 0.052 

Trimming 30.89 0.182 1.136 34.94 0.018 0.060 

Vrheadset 31.60 0.197 0.971 33.53 0.051 0.287 

Specifically, under a storage budget of only 0.03 MB, So-LAR still achieves a reconstruction quality of 32.39 dB. By contrast, 3DGStream requires 4.10 MB to reach 30.06 dB. This comparison indicates that SoLAR retains competitive reconstruction fidelity even under highly constrained storage, achieving a PSNR advantage of more than 2 dB while reducing storage by over two orders of magnitude. More broadly, across different storage regimes, SoLAR consistently preserves fa-vorable reconstruction quality, indicating that its performance degrades gracefully as the storage budget becomes tighter. Taken together, these results suggest that the proposed frame-work is well suited to supporting a flexible trade-off between reconstruction fidelity and resource consumption, which is desirable for deployment under heterogeneous system budgets. 

G. Stability Analysis 

We evaluate the stability of SoLAR from two complemen-tary perspectives: temporal stability and statistical stability. Temporal stability measures whether reconstruction quality can be maintained consistently along the sequence, and there-fore reflects the ability of a streaming reconstruction method to resist temporal drift and error accumulation. Statistical IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 15 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 

> Frame
> 24
> 26
> 28
> 30
> 32
> 34
> 36
> PSNR
> SoLAR
> iFVC

(a) Cook Spinach 0 50 100 150 200 250 300  

> Frame
> 27.0
> 27.5
> 28.0
> 28.5
> 29.0
> 29.5
> 30.0
> 30.5
> 31.0
> PSNR
> SoLAR
> iFVC

(b) Flame Salmon 0 50 100 150 200 250 300  

> Frame
> 28
> 30
> 32
> 34
> PSNR
> SoLAR
> iFVC

(c) Trimming 0 50 100 150 200 250 300  

> Frame
> 28
> 29
> 30
> 31
> 32
> 33
> 34
> PSNR
> SoLAR
> iFVC

(d) Vrheadset 

Fig. 9. Temporal and statistical stability over 300-frame streaming sequences. Frame-wise reconstruction performance over the 300-frame sequence, aggregated over five independent runs. The solid line denotes the mean at each frame, and the shaded region indicates one standard deviation across runs. Across all scenes, SoLAR consistently yields higher reconstruction quality with lower variance, indicating superior robustness and stability. 

stability, in contrast, measures the sensitivity of the method to repeated runs under identical settings. This aspect is partic-ularly relevant for 3DGS-based methods, where stochastic op-timization may still lead to non-negligible run-to-run variation even when the experimental configuration is fixed. To jointly assess these two aspects, we conduct five independent full-sequence runs for SoLAR and the baseline iFVC on four rep-resentative scenes. In each run, the model is evaluated over the complete 300-frame sequence. Fig. 9 reports the frame-wise reconstruction performance averaged over the five repeated runs, where the solid curve denotes the per-frame mean and the shaded band indicates the corresponding standard deviation. Tab. VIII further summarizes three complementary statistics: (1) μseq , the mean reconstruction performance over the 300-frame sequence, averaged across the five independent runs; (2) 

σrun , the mean per-frame standard deviation across repeated runs, which measures optimization-induced variability; and (3) σtemp , the temporal standard deviation of reconstruction performance over the full sequence, averaged across the five runs, which measures sequence-level quality fluctuation. The results show that SoLAR improves not only the average reconstruction quality but also both forms of stability. Across all four scenes, SoLAR achieves consistently higher μseq than iFVC. The improvement is particularly pronounced on Cook Spinach and Trimming , where the average PSNR increases from 28.29 dB to 34.75 dB and from 30.89 dB to 34.94 dB, re-spectively. More importantly, these quality gains are accompa-nied by substantially lower run-to-run variation. For example, on Cook Spinach , σrun is reduced from 1.376 dB for iFVC to 0.085 dB for SoLAR ; on Flame Salmon , it decreases from 0.312 dB to 0.020 dB; and on Trimming , it decreases from 0.182 dB to 0.018 dB. These reductions indicate that SoLAR 

is substantially less sensitive to stochastic variations during op-timization and can produce more repeatable reconstruction be-havior under identical settings. A similar advantage is observed in temporal stability. Compared with iFVC, SoLAR consis-tently yields lower σtemp across all scenes, indicating that its reconstruction quality fluctuates less over the 300-frame sequence. This trend is especially evident on Trimming , where 

σtemp decreases from 1.136 dB to 0.060 dB, and on Vrheadset ,where it decreases from 0.971 dB to 0.287 dB. Since temporal fluctuation in streaming reconstruction is closely related to accumulated transformation errors, the reduced σtemp suggests that SoLAR more effectively suppresses error propagation and maintains a stable reconstruction trajectory throughout the sequence. Therefore, the stability results demonstrate that 

SoLAR reduces variability across repeated optimizations and preserves more consistent quality over time. VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, we present SoLAR , the first error-resilient streamable FVV framework that maintains stable reconstruc-tion quality over long sequences without requiring GOP partitioning, thereby effectively avoiding the severe per-formance degradation commonly observed in existing ap-proaches. Specifically, SoLAR introduces Anchor Activation Dynamics to better capture complex non-rigid transforma-tions, which improves both scene compactness and repre-sentational capacity. Furthermore, inspired by bit allocation theory, dynamic-anchor-based volumetric video representation is analyzed within a RD optimization framework under rate control, based on which Latent Discrepancy Aware Recali-bration is proposed to identify discrepancies between latent representations and recalibrate the correspondences encoded in the network. This design effectively mitigates error propa-gation in LFVV while preserving real-time performance and storage efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that 

SoLAR achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction quality with minimal storage overhead, highlighting its effectiveness for stable and efficient long-horizon streamable FVV reconstruc-tion. By addressing error propagation without relying on GOP partitioning, SoLAR provides a practical step toward the deployment of immersive streaming systems. Despite these promising results, several limitations remain. First, the overall performance of SoLAR is sensitive to the quality of the initial I-frame, since errors in the initial represen-tation may propagate through subsequent predictions. Second, although the proposed framework substantially improves long-term stability, performance degradation can still occur under extremely severe motion patterns, especially when abrupt scene changes exceed the modeling capacity of the current architecture. Future work will therefore focus on improving the representation quality of the initial I-frame and further en-hancing the adaptive modeling capability of dynamic anchors, with the goal of achieving excellent robustness under highly dynamic long-horizon scenarios. REFERENCES [1] J. Zhu and H. Tang, “Dynamic scene reconstruction: Recent advance in real-time rendering and streaming,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08166 ,2025. [2] T. Li, M. Slavcheva, M. Zollhoefer, S. Green, C. Lassner, C. Kim, T. Schmidt, S. Lovegrove, M. Goesele, R. Newcombe et al. , “Neural 3D Video Synthesis from Multi-view Video,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 16 

[3] L. Li, Z. Shen, Z. Wang, L. Shen, and P. Tan, “Streaming Radiance Fields for 3D Video Synthesis,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [4] Z. Zheng, Z. Wu, H. Zhong, Y. Tian, N. Cao, L. Xu, J. Yao, X. Zhang, Q. Hu, and W. Zhang, “4dgcpro: Efficient hierarchical 4d gaussian compression for progressive volumetric video streaming,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2025. [5] Y. Duan, F. Wei, Q. Dai, Y. He, W. Chen, and B. Chen, “4d-rotor gaussian splatting: towards efficient novel view synthesis for dynamic scenes,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers (SIGGRAPH) ,2024. [6] Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Li, and Y. Xu, “Spacetime Gaussian Feature Splatting for Real-Time Dynamic View Synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [7] Z. Xu, S. Peng, H. Lin, G. He, J. Sun, Y. Shen, H. Bao, and X. Zhou, “4k4d: Real-time 4d view synthesis at 4k resolution,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 20 029–20 040. [8] J. Sun, H. Jiao, G. Li, Z. Zhang, L. Zhao, and W. Xing, “3dgstream: On-the-fly training of 3d gaussians for efficient streaming of photo-realistic free-viewpoint videos,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 20 675– 20 685. [9] L. Tang, J. Yang, R. Peng, Y. Zhai, S. Shen, and R. Wang, “Compressing streamable free-viewpoint videos to 0.1 mb per frame,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , vol. 39, no. 7, 2025, pp. 7257–7265. [10] Q. Gao, J. Meng, C. Wen, J. Chen, and J. Zhang, “Hicom: Hierarchical coherent motion for dynamic streamable scenes with 3d gaussian splat-ting,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,vol. 37, 2024, pp. 80 609–80 633. [11] J. Fu, Q. Gao, C. Wen, Y. Wu, S. Ma, J. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Recon-gs: Continuum-preserved gaussian streaming for fast and compact re-construction of dynamic scenes,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2025. [12] Z. Xu, Y. Xu, Z. Yu, S. Peng, J. Sun, H. Bao, and X. Zhou, “Repre-senting long volumetric video with temporal gaussian hierarchy,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1–18, 2024. [13] R. Shaw, M. Nazarczuk, J. Song, A. Moreau, S. Catley-Chandar, H. Dhamo, and E. P´ erez-Pellitero, “Swings: sliding windows for dy-namic 3d gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the European Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ECCV) . Springer, 2024, pp. 37–54. [14] L. Li, B. Li, H. Li, and C. W. Chen, “ λ-domain optimal bit allocation algorithm for high efficiency video coding,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 130–142, 2018. [15] S. Hu, H. Wang, S. Kwong, T. Zhao, and C.-C. J. Kuo, “Rate control optimization for temporal-layer scalable video coding,” IEEE Transac-tions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 1152–1162, 2011. [16] B. Li, H. Li, L. Li, and J. Zhang, “Rate control by R-lambda model for HEVC,” ITU-T SG16 Contribution, JCTVC-K0103 , pp. 1–5, 2012. [17] B. Li, H. Li, L. Li, and J. Zhang, “ λ domain rate control algorithm for High Efficiency Video Coding,” IEEE Transactions on Image Process-ing , vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 3841–3854, 2014. [18] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨ uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023. [19] K. Ren, L. Jiang, T. Lu, M. Yu, L. Xu, Z. Ni, and B. Dai, “Octree-gs: To-wards consistent real-time rendering with lod-structured 3d gaussians,” 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. [20] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi, and R. Ng, “NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020. [21] W. Gao, L. Xie, S. Fan, G. Li, S. Liu, and W. Gao, “Deep learning-based point cloud compression: An in-depth survey and benchmark,” 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. [22] B. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Li, D. Liu, Z. Li, and H. Li, “Next bit prediction: A unified lossless and lossy point cloud geometry compression frame-work,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,2026. [23] J. Wang, D. Ding, Z. Li, X. Feng, C. Cao, and Z. Ma, “Sparse tensor-based multiscale representation for point cloud geometry compres-sion,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 9055–9071, 2023. [24] Y. Chen, Q. Wu, W. Lin, M. Harandi, and J. Cai, “Hac++: Towards 100x compression of 3d gaussian splatting,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. [25] S. Lee, F. Shu, Y. Sanchez, T. Schierl, and C. Hellge, “Compression of 3d gaussian splatting with optimized feature planes and standard video codecs,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025, pp. 25 496–25 505. [26] G. Fang and B. Wang, “Efficient scene modeling via structure-aware and region-prioritized 3d gaussians,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. [27] Y. Xiao, D. Zhai, W. Zhao, K. Jiang, J. Jiang, and X. Liu, “Mcgs: Mul-tiview consistency enhancement for sparse-view 3d gaussian radiance fields,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,2025. [28] S. Niedermayr, J. Stumpfegger, and R. Westermann, “Compressed 3d gaussian splatting for accelerated novel view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 10 349–10 358. [29] J. C. Lee, D. Rho, X. Sun, J. H. Ko, and E. Park, “Compact 3d gaussian representation for radiance field,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 21 719–21 728. [30] Z. Fan, K. Wang, K. Wen, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, Z. Wang et al. , “Lightgaussian: Unbounded 3d gaussian compression with 15x reduction and 200+ fps,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [31] T. Lu, M. Yu, L. Xu, Y. Xiangli, L. Wang, D. Lin, and B. Dai, “Scaffold-gs: Structured 3d gaussians for view-adaptive rendering,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 20 654–20 664. [32] Y. Chen, Q. Wu, W. Lin, M. Harandi, and J. Cai, “Hac: Hash-grid assisted context for 3d gaussian splatting compression,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) . Springer, 2024, pp. 422–438. [33] A. Pumarola, E. Corona, G. Pons-Moll, and F. Moreno-Noguer, “D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for dynamic scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021, pp. 10 318–10 327. [34] Z. Yang, H. Yang, Z. Pan, and L. Zhang, “Real-time Photorealistic Dy-namic Scene Representation and Rendering with 4D Gaussian Splatting,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [35] Y. Wang, P. Yang, Z. Xu, J. Sun, Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Bao, S. Peng, and X. Zhou, “Freetimegs: Free gaussian primitives at anytime anywhere for dynamic scene reconstruction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 21 750–21 760. [36] G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, W. Liu, Q. Tian, and X. Wang, “4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 20 310–20 320. [37] Y. Lin, Z. Dai, S. Zhu, and Y. Yao, “Gaussian-flow: 4d reconstruction with dynamic 3d gaussian particle,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 21 136–21 145. [38] Y.-H. Huang, Y.-T. Sun, Z. Yang, X. Lyu, Y.-P. Cao, and X. Qi, “Sc-gs: Sparse-controlled gaussian splatting for editable dynamic scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 4220–4230. [39] S. Kwak, J. Kim, J. Y. Jeong, W.-S. Cheong, J. Oh, and M. Kim, “Modec-gs: Global-to-local motion decomposition and temporal interval adjustment for compact dynamic 3d gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 11 338–11 348. [40] Z. Li, S. Niklaus, N. Snavely, and O. Wang, “Neural scene flow fields for space-time view synthesis of dynamic scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2021, pp. 6498–6508. [41] Z. Yang, X. Gao, W. Zhou, S. Jiao, Y. Zhang, and X. Jin, “Deformable 3D Gaussians for High-Fidelity Monocular Dynamic Scene Reconstruc-tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. [42] J. Yan, R. Peng, Z. Wang, L. Tang, J. Yang, J. Liang, J. Wu, and R. Wang, “Instant gaussian stream: Fast and generalizable streaming of dynamic scene reconstruction via gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 16 520–16 531. [43] L. Wang, Q. Hu, Q. He, Z. Wang, J. Yu, T. Tuytelaars, L. Xu, and M. Wu, “Neural residual radiance fields for streamably free-viewpoint videos,” IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. XX, XXXX 2026 17 

in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023, pp. 76–87. [44] X. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Ge, D. He, T. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Lin, S. Yan, and J. Zhang, “Mega: Memory-efficient 4d gaussian splatting for dynamic scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025, pp. 27 828–27 838. [45] G. J. Sullivan and T. Wiegand, “Rate-distortion optimization for video compression,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 74–90, 1998. [46] N. Kamaci, Y. Altunbasak, and R. M. Mersereau, “Frame bit allocation for the h. 264/avc video coder via cauchy-density-based rate and distortion models,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 994–1006, 2005. [47] P. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Yao, S. Xie, J. Yu, M. Wu, and L. Xu, “V 3: Viewing volumetric videos on mobiles via streamable 2d dynamic gaussians,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1–13, 2024. [48] B. Attal, J.-B. Huang, C. Richardt, M. Zollhoefer, J. Kopf, M. O’Toole, and C. Kim, “Hyperreel: High-fidelity 6-dof video with ray-conditioned sampling,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023, pp. 16 610–16 620. [49] M. Wu, Z. Wang, G. Kouros, and T. Tuytelaars, “Tetrirf: Temporal tri-plane radiance fields for efficient free-viewpoint video,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 6487–6496. [50] J. Chen, Q. Mao, Y. Bao, X. Meng, F. Meng, R. Wang, and Y. Liang, “Motion matters: Compact gaussian streaming for free-viewpoint video reconstruction,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2025. [51] Z. Wang, J. Li, and Y. Zhu, “Airgs: Real-time 4d gaussian streaming for free-viewpoint video experiences,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.20943 ,2025. [52] H. Li, S. Li, X. Gao, A. Batuer, L. Yu, and Y. Liao, “Gifstream: 4d gaussian-based immersive video with feature stream,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 21 761–21 770. [53] L. Wang, K. Yao, C. Guo, Z. Zhang, Q. Hu, J. Yu, L. Xu, and M. Wu, “Videorf: Rendering dynamic radiance fields as 2d feature video streams,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 470–481. [54] S. Kheradmand, D. Vicini, G. Kopanas, D. Lagun, K. M. Yi, M. Matthews, and A. Tagliasacchi, “Stochasticsplats: Stochastic raster-ization for sorting-free 3d gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025, pp. 26 326–26 335. [55] Y. Ma, B. Liu, J. Li, L. Li, and D. Liu, “Hash grid feature pruning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22882 , 2025. [56] Y. Jiang, C. Guo, Y. Wu, Y. Hong, S. Zhu, Z. Shen, Y. Zhang, S. Jiao, Z. Su, L. Xu et al. , “Topology-aware optimization of gaussian primitives for human-centric volumetric videos,” in Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Papers (SIGGRAPH Asia) , 2025, pp. 1–12. [57] C. Zhang, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, W. Li, D. Wang, Y. Xu, and S. Jiao, “Evolvinggs: Stable volumetric video via high-fidelity evolving 3d gaussian reconstruction,” in Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Technical Communications (SIGGRAPH Asia) , 2025, pp. 1–4. [58] Y. Liu, Z. Zhong, Y. Zhan, S. Xu, and X. Sun, “Maskgaussian: Adaptive 3d gaussian representation from probabilistic masks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025, pp. 681–690. [59] H. Wang, H. Zhu, T. He, R. Feng, J. Deng, J. Bian, and Z. Chen, “End-to-end rate-distortion optimized 3d gaussian representation,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) . Springer, 2024, pp. 76–92. [60] J. Wu, R. Peng, Z. Wang, L. Xiao, L. Tang, J. Yan, K. Xiong, and R. Wang, “Swift4d: Adaptive divide-and-conquer gaussian splatting for compact and efficient reconstruction of dynamic scene,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [61] Z. Zheng, X. Zhao, H. Zhang, B. Liu, and Y. Liu, “Avatarrex: Real-time expressive full-body avatars,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–19, 2023. [62] J. Yoon, S. Han, J. Oh, and M. Lee, “Splinegs: Learning smooth trajectories in gaussian splatting for dynamic scene reconstruction,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [63] S. Girish, T. Li, A. Mazumdar, A. Shrivastava, S. De Mello et al. ,“QUEEN: QUantized Efficient ENcoding of Dynamic Gaussians for Streaming Free-viewpoint Videos,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [64] W. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, Z. Xu, L. Song, and Z. Cheng, “D-fcgs: Feedforward compression of dynamic gaussian splatting for free-viewpoint videos,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , vol. 40, no. 19, 2026, pp. 16 361–16 369. [65] Q. Hu, Z. Zheng, H. Zhong, S. Fu, L. Song, X. Zhang, G. Zhai, and Y. Wang, “4dgc: Rate-aware 4d gaussian compression for efficient streamable free-viewpoint video,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. [66] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004. [67] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2018, pp. 586–595. [68] J. Yan, R. Peng, L. Tang, and R. Wang, “4D Gaussian Splatting with Scale-aware Residual Field and Adaptive Optimization for Real-time rendering of temporally complex dynamic scenes,” in Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia (ACM MM) , 2024.