Title: Compression of 3D Gaussian Splatting Data Using GPU-friendly Graphics Texture Coding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.14513v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 01:11:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Compression of 3D Gaussian Splatting Data Using GPU-friendly Graphics Texture Coding 

Amir Said 

Qualcomm AI Research 

San Diego, CA, USA asaid@qti.qualcomm.com, said@ieee.org 

Randall Rauwendaal 

Qualcomm Graphics Research 

Boulder, CO, USA rrauwend@qti.qualcomm.com 

Abstract —Techniques for modeling 3D scenes from image collections, such as 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), are capable of generating high-quality novel views by leveraging graphics primitives with view-dependent appearance. In 3DGS, spherical harmonic (SH) are employed to model view-dependent color, resulting in a large number of SH coefficients per primitive and large memory requirements. While compression approaches have been proposed to mitigate this problem, they do not exploit the capabilities of modern Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) for parallel decoding and rendering. In this paper, we propose a method for compressing SH color coefficients using texture com-pression schemes specifically designed for efficient parallel GPU decoding and supported by dedicated hardware acceleration. It is shown that those methods can compress color coefficients more effectively than 2D textures by exploiting the fact that primitives can be locally grouped and reordered according to color. Furthermore, we introduce a bit-rate control strategy that preserves random access, enabling large-scale paralleliza-tion without compromising rendering performance. Experimental results using BC1 and BC7 texture compression formats show that GPU-based decompression can be achieved with negligible or imperceptible degradation in the visual quality of rendered 3DGS scenes. 

Index Terms —3D Gaussian Splatting compression, graphics texture compression, compression parallelization 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Novel view synthesis models of natural 3D scenes can be created using the scheme shown in Fig. 1, where a collection of scene views (images) is used to create a set of learned graphics primitives, which have their parameters optimized to minimize the visual differences between rendered and reference views. From those learned scene models the new views are generated by rendering the model’s learned graphics primitives. While this approach has been studied for decades, it only started to be widely adopted with the introduction of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [1], which creates scene models composed of learned 3D geometric primitives with a Gaussian spatial distribution of color and opacity, and visualized with the volumetric rendering splatting technique [2]. There has been a significant amount of research for improv-ing and extending 3DGS [3]–[6], and it has been demonstrated that, with enough high-resolution views for learning, 3DGS views could be rendered with relatively low computational complexity, and visual quality indistinguishable from photos (for instance, the image shown in Fig. 1 was generated with 3DGS). 3D scene views 

Model generation and optimization 

Learned graphics primitives 

3D scene rendering 

Camera (view) parameters 

3D scene representation Generated view of 3D scene 

Fig. 1. 3D scene modeling and novel view synthesis using learned graphics primitives. 

One practical problem of learned 3D scene models is that they can only generate high-quality views of scenes containing surfaces with complex appearance, like reflective or transpar-ent materials, if the appearance of graphics primitives can vary according to view direction. For instance, 3DGS learns 16 RGB color vector coefficients and combine them using a spherical harmonic representation to provide view-dependent appearances (color) to its Gaussian primitives. Furthermore, a large number of primitives is needed to obtain realistic scene views, since they must capture all details in textured and complex objects. The large number of primi-tives, combined with the number of parameters per primitive, result in learned models that require large amounts of memory, increasing storage, transmission and rendering costs. This strongly motivates the use of compression for reducing a model’s memory size, and many compression techniques have been proposed for 3DGS data, showing significant data reduction [7]–[9]. However, those solutions have one important practical limitation: they do not exploit the fact that 3DGS is a form of computer graphics, and that views are expected to be rendered using Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) that can only achieve maximum efficiency with wide scale paralleliza-tion. arXiv:2607.14513v1 [cs.CV] 16 Jul 2026 Texture mapping                  

> Compressed M×N×Cblock
> Rendered image
> Decode Decode Decode Decode Decode Decode
> Render Render Render Render Render Render
> · · ·
> Compressed texture bitstream
> Random access
> · · ·
> · · · Fig. 2. Parallel joint decoding and rendering of graphics textures within GPUs, enabled by random access to compressed data.

We can find good examples of compression matched to GPU capabilities in the methods for compressing graphics textures [10], [11] that have been designed to compress blocks of texture elements ( texels ) with a fixed number of bits. This allows easy random access to a block’s compressed data, since it can be located in a bitstream by simply multiplying the block index with the number of bits per block. This random access feature, in turn, enables very efficient forms of parallel execution of texture decoding and rendering, as shown in the diagram of Fig. 2. Thanks to this GPU parallel execution it is possible to render in real time highly complex scenes, comprised of billions of graphics primitives, because  

> •

Information in textures that are not visible in the current view are never decompressed.  

> •

Within the compressed data, only the information needed for rendering is decompressed locally by the GPU cores.  

> •

Maintaining the data in compressed form until actually needed reduces the bandwidth between texture memory and rendering cores, which is a major performance lim-iting factor.  

> •

Texture decoding matches the GPU’s parallelization ar-chitecture, scaling in each GPU generation.  

> •

Custom GPU hardware acceleration for texture decom-pression further minimizes texture access times and en-ergy requirements. In this paper we propose methods for compressing 3DGS data that employ methods developed for standard texture compression, as a form to extend all the advantageous features listed above to 3DGS rendering, and facilitate rendering very complex and large scenes. The paper also addresses one potential limitation of this approach, which is the fact that it must employ forms of compression that supports random access to compressed data. In information theory terms, random access requires encoding data with a constant bitrate while trying to minimize the distortion (reproduction errors). The consequence of this very strong constraint is that texture compression methods are significantly less effective than image coding methods that support variable bitrates (like JPEG), i.e., compression methods that allow varying the number of bits employed for each block according to its data characteristics. This problem cannot be avoided for graphics texture com-pression because texels are encoded together in blocks within two-dimensional grids, which cannot be modified because they are required by texture mapping during rendering. The parameters of 3DGS primitives, on the other hand, can be reorganized. In fact, the splatting and opacity blending processes require resorting primitives according to distance to camera before rendering each view [1]. This freedom to organize and group 3DGS data before coding has been exploited to improve conventional compression. In this paper we show that it can be leveraged to greatly improve constant bitrate compression, while preserving the ability to randomly access compressed data. We study the following two approaches  

> •

It is demonstrated that partially sorting primitives accord-ing to color can result in significantly lower distortion.  

> •

Using multiple compressed data bitstreams, different forms of fixed-bitrate coding can be applied to primitives with different number of color components for view-dependent appearance, enabling more efficient variable assignments of bitrates. In the following sections we define how to employ standard graphics texture coding methods to 3DGS primitive parame-ters. II. 3DGS PRIMITIVE PARAMETERS 

Information about how 3DGS and its extensions are im-plemented can be found in references like [3]–[6]. In this section we review the 3DGS formulation, constraining it to the original 3DGS implementation [1], since it is the most well-known, and the proposed techniques can be easily extended to most modifications and extensions. During the learning stage, each 3DGS primitive is defined by the following parameters:  

> •

t ∈ R – value for defining primitive’s opacity;  

> •

p ∈ R3 – primitive’s Gaussian center in scene space;  

> •

q ∈ R4 – quaternion defining Gaussian rotation;  

> •

s ∈ R3 – Gaussian scaling vector;  

> •

H ∈ R3×Nh – matrix with 3 × Nh spherical har-monic coefficients, where each column corresponds to 3-dimensional RGB color vectors. To increase convergence, learning can start with Nh = 1 

and later Nh is progressively increased to 16. Using a variable number of spherical harmonic coefficients Nh per primitive in the compressed data is discussed in Section IV. One common assumption is that those are the parameters that must to be compressed for scene rendering. In reality, those parameters are appropriate during learning, but t, s

and q need to be converted for rendering, and as explained below, matrix H should also be modified for compression and rendering. p 

> x
> fFig. 3. Rendering of a single 3D Gaussian Splatting primitive.

The primitive’s intrinsic opacity is obtained from a sigmoid transformation 

μ def 

= 11 + e−t ∈ [0 , 1] . (1) while s and q define the symmetric Gaussian covariance matrix 

Σ def 

= R(q)D(s)DT(s)RT(q) ∈ R3×3, (2) where D and R are respectively scaling and rotation matrices. Using those values, the primitive’s opacity at position x in space is 

α(x) def 

= μ g (x) = μ exp 



− (x − p)T

Σ−1(x − p)2



, (3) defining the primitive’s ellipsoid shape, as illustrated in Fig. 3. From a view position f , the primitive’s color contribution at position x (cf. Fig. 3) can be defined as 

c(f ) = H w (f − p), (4) where w(·) ∈ RNh is the vector function for computing the spherical harmonic factors, defining the view-dependent color. Using i to represent the index of primitives sorted according to distance to camera, the view color is defined by the alpha blending equation 

a =

> P

X

> i=1

α(i)c(i)

> i−1

Y

> j=1



1 − α(j)

. (5) Since the color vector c is always multiplied by opacity α,the alpha blending equation is equivalent to 

a =

> P

X

> i=1

˜c(i)

> i−1

Y

> j=1



1 − α(j)

. (6) where now 

˜c(x, f ) = α(x) H w (f − p) (7) 

= g(x) ˜H w (f − p) (8) and ˜H = μ H. (9) This means we can use matrix ˜H, with coefficients pre-multiplied by opacity μ, directly as primitive parameter. This can save multiplications during rendering and, more impor-tantly for compression, since μ ∈ [0 , 1] , ˜H can be more efficiently encoded than H.The parameters of each 3DGS primitive can be separated into the following categories:  

> •

Position: vector p with (x, y, z ) coordinates.  

> •

Shape: defined by the 3 × 3 matrix Σ. Since it is symmetric, only three coefficients need to be included in the compressed data.  

> •

Opacity: one parameter μ defining the opacity factor for each primitive.  

> •

Appearance: matrix ˜H with 3Nh elements. Thus, the number of parameters per 3DGS primitive is 

10 + 3 × Nh. In the case Nh = 16 we have 58 parameters, meaning that without compression the spherical harmonic RGB coefficients represent 83% of the total memory. III. F IXED BITRATE COMPRESSION 

A. Block truncation coding 

Image compression standards that use entropy coding, like JPEG, cannot efficiently provide random access with the fine granularity required during parallel rendering. Thus, they could not be used for graphics textures, and compression meth-ods specialized for graphics textures and parallel decoding were developed. The texture compression methods are designed to support the type of parallel implementation shown in Fig. 2: tex-ture blocks comprising of M×N×C texel data elements are compressed with a fixed number of bits (commonly bytes), enabling fast and simple random access to each block, which is decoded and used for rendering by each parallel processor. In terms of data compression techniques, this corresponds to a type of vector quantization (VQ), However, conventional VQ techniques commonly employ large codebooks for decoding. This is relatively fast, but the codebooks typically are very large, making this approach unsuitable for parallel decoding, since all processors may need to keep reading large amounts of codebook data. This vector quantization problem was solved for texture compression by using a type of image compression, called Block Truncation Coding (BTC) [12]–[14], that generates a fixed number of bits per image block without using any additional codebook memory. The most basic form of BTC for RGB color images is a form of vector quantization that uses Q bits to store the indexes of quantized RGB vectors, with 

F = 2 Q − 1. (10) For each image block with M × N RGB pixels, two refer-ence RGB vectors (c0, cF ) are chosen and encoded with P bits used for each reference. Those BTC reference vectors define R                         

> G
> B
> c0
> c1
> c2
> c3Fig. 4. Example of how Block Truncation Coding (BTC) defines reproduction vectors and interpolation in RGB color space ( Q= 2 bits). c0cF
> M×N
> interpolation indexes
> Pbits Pbits Qbits
> Fig. 5. Data organization of BTC compressed blocks: 2×Pbits are used for reference color vectors c0and cF, and M×N×Qbits for interpolation indexes.

a sequence L = {ck}Fk=0 of 2Q equally spaced points in the RGB space, between points c0 and cF , i.e., for k = 0 , 1, . . . , F 

ck = F − kF c0 + kF cF . (11) This is illustrated by the example in Fig. 4, where Q = 2 .The pixels in a block are compressed using M ×N ×Q bits that indicate the index of the best approximation within the reference line, i.e., for each pixel with RGB vector vi,j the reproduction vector index k(i, j ) corresponds to 

k(i, j ) = argmin 

> k=0 ,1,...,F

|| vi,j − ck|| , (12) for i = 0 , 1, . . . , M − 1, and j = 0 , 1, . . . , N − 1.Fig. 5 shows how the BTC compressed data is organized in blocks with the same number of bits. The values of P and Q

are commonly chosen so that the total number of bits used to represent a pixel block, 2 × P + M × N × Q, is a multiple of 8. One important feature of this type of vector quantization is that all the information needed to decode a block is obtained from the compressed data, and there is no form of shared codebook. In fact, the interpolated colors are equivalent to VQ codebooks, but are computed for each set of M × N pixels. This greatly improves performance during parallel decoding, ikj ij                         

> 0123456701234567
> j0j1j2
> k0k1k2k3k4k5
> i0i1i2014516 17 20 21 236718 19 22 23 8912 13 24 25 28 29 10 11 14 15 26 27 30 31 32 33 36 37 48 49 52 53 34 35 38 39 50 51 54 55 40 41 44 45 56 57 60 61 42 43 46 47 58 59 62 63
> Fig. 6. Example of two-dimensional recursive zigzag scan of an 8×8block, generated by interleaving index bits. RGB
> Fig. 7. Generalization of the scheme in Fig. 6: interleaved bits in the bytes representing red, green, and blue generate 24-bit values that can be sorted, and the sorting order used for clustering color vectors.

since it eliminates the need to copy data from large codebook memory. 

B. Standard texture compression 

Among the most used standards we have the Block Com-pression (BC) formats, numbered BC1, BC2, . . . , BC7, that are supported by Microsoft’s Direct3D 11 specification [11], and Adaptive Scalable Texture Compression (ASTC) [10], pro-posed by ARM and AMD, was standardized by the Khronos Group in 2013. Since those are used in many video game implementations, modern GPUs integrate specialized hardware to decompress data from those compression formats. Those standards for graphics texture compression employ and extend BTC as described in the previous section. For instance, adding an alpha channel (transparency) for RGBA data, or the option to have two or three pairs of reference RGB vectors per block. While we can have blocks with different sizes, the most commonly used is M = N = 4 , i.e., they are applied to blocks of 4 × 4 RGB or RGBA vectors. 

C. Clustering via color sorting 

As mentioned in the introduction, compression methods using BTC have the advantage of enabling random access and parallel decoding and rendering, but at the expense of not having the freedom to change the number of bits per block according to the block’s properties. While the number of bits used per BTC block cannot be changed, what varies per block is the reproduction error, and as we can observe from the example in Fig. 4 that this error depends on how the block’s RGB vectors can be represented in a line segment. Blocks with large RGB vector variance cannot be well represented, while blocks that have colors highly clustered are much better reproduced. In fact, the reproduction error can go to zero if all RGB vectors are the same. image 1 sorted 1 image 2 sorted 2 Fig. 8. Examples of images that have pixels sorted according to values from RGB vectors, clustering similar color. 

Next we show that we exploit this property to greatly improve the compression efficiency of BTC, if the grouping of RGB vectors for BTC coding can be modified so that those vectors are more similar. There are many methods that can be used for reorganizing and clustering similar color vectors. To demonstrate that it possible to obtain good results without needing complex clustering, we employ a simple technique based on the well-known 2-dimensional recursive zigzag scans, which can be easily generated by interleaving bits from the 2-dimensional position indexes, as shown in Fig. 6. The process shown in Fig. 6 can be extended to 3-dimensional RGB vectors by using the bit-interleaving scheme illustrated in Fig. 7, and the following sequence is used to group vectors for BTC coding. 1) For each RGB vector, interleave bits of the three bytes representing red, green and blue, using the scheme shown in Fig. 7, to create 24-bit integer values. 2) Sort those values in increasing or decreasing order. 3) Group RGB vectors for BTC encoding using the order obtained for values from interleaved bits. Fig. 8 shows examples of the results of this RGB sorting process, where for easier 2D visualization, the final order is shown using a recursive zigzag scan of the type shown in Fig. 6. We can observe that the images with sorted RGB values contain the same information, but they are organized by the sorting process to have much higher local similarity between colors. Fig. 9 shows how this greatly changes the effectiveness of BTC compression. We can observe that when the standard texture compression formats BC1 and BC7 are applied to the original images the results are much worse then those produced by JPEG, as measured by PSNR distortion. However, we can also observe that when those compression methods are applied to the images with sorted RGB vectors, the resulting 4 5 6 7 8 

> Bit rate (bpp)
> 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
> PSNR (dB)
> JPEG, image 1
> JPEG, image 2
> BC1, image 1
> BC1, sorted 1
> BC1, image 2
> BC1, sorted 2
> BC7, image 1
> BC7, sorted 1
> BC7, image 2
> BC7, sorted 2
> Fig. 9. Comparison of JPEG, BC1, and BC7 compression on the images and their sorted versions shown in Fig. 8.

PSNR jumps up by more than 10 dB, representing a very dramatic improvement in compression efficiency. As explained in the introduction, this approach cannot be used for compressing 2-dimensional graphics textures because it would require extra bits for coding the indexes of each texels. 3DGS primitives, on the other hand, already have spatial positions as primitive data, so no extra data is needed after reordering. While it is better to also consider spatial positions during reordering, to keep primitives that are rendered together in nearby memory positions, BTC is applied to small blocks, so better compression can be also be achieved is color sorting is done independently in larger groups of primitives, so that spatial and color clustering can effectively work together. IV. O RGANIZING 3DGS PARAMETERS FOR COMPRESSION 

A. Hierarchical compressed data organization 

The first aspect to be considered for developing practical compression for 3DGS is the necessity of having a compressed data format able to efficiently support large scale novel view synthesis [15], where scenes comprise a large area (e.g., a whole city block), and each part can be represented with millions of primitives. In those large scenes the rendering process must efficiently cover the following range of viewing conditions. 1) Views covering a small part of the scene must use a only the small fraction of primitives that define that part, ignoring the rest. 2) Views covering large scene areas cannot render all the primitives contained in the view frustrum because the number is too high, but also because adding unfiltered details can cause very objectionable aliasing artifacts. Those are fundamental problems in computer graphics, and the solutions developed for this problem use hierarchical representations of the scene, which are used to change the Spatio-temporal org.          

> Level-of-detail org.
> Primitive parameters
> Shape Appearance Position
> Type 1Type 2Type TFig. 10. Hierarchical organization of compressed primitive parameters to enable efficient rendering of large and highly detailed scenes without aliasing artifacts and extended to support variable bitrate and random access. Primitive parameters Compressed data bitstreams
> Data rearrangement
> Block quant. and coding
> Block quant. and coding
> Scalar quantization Scalar quantization
> Data combination
> Fig. 11. 3DGS parameter separation for generating multiple compressed data bitstreams.

rendering process to support a variable level of detail (LOD) according to the view distances. A format for compressed 3DGS scenes must also support that approach, using a hierarchical representation as shown in Fig. 10. This is similar to other graphics representations, extended to support two additional requirements: 1) The position and shape parameters are coded separately from appearance, since they are needed to determine if the primitive can be visible in current rendered frame (i.e., belongs to the view frustum). 2) Appearance parameters can use different number of bits, and to enable random access, those with same number of bits are put together in different bitstreams. Examples of coding methods generating different number of bits are described in the next section. Here the important observation is that primitives coded with different methods are separated as different types, as shown in Fig. 10, which need to use different decoders before rendering. In general, the com-pressed data format uses the scheme shown in Fig. 11, where primitives are first rearranged according to some parameter properties. For example, primitives with similar colors are put together to improve compression. Next, different types of parameters are separated according to how they can be best quantized and encoded. For example, vector quantization may not be efficient for shape parameters, and instead they can be simply quantized to a fixed number of Gaussian Splatting            

> Fixed-size blocks of compressed parameters
> Rendered image
> Decode Decode Decode Decode Decode Decode
> Render Render Render Render Render Render
> · · ·
> Compressed parameter bitstreams
> Random access
> · · ·
> · · ·
> · · ·
> · · ·
> Fig. 12. Parallel decoding of 3DGS parameters and rendering, enabled by random access to compressed data organized in different bitstreams, according to block organization and size.

bits per parameter. The bits obtained from quantization are put together into different bitstreams so that the decoding method is defined by the index uniquely identifying a bitstream. 

B. Multiple bitstreams for variable bitrates and random ac-cess 

As explained above, using the same number of bits to code a certain type of information is essential to enable random access for parallel decoding and rendering. This leads to suboptimal compression, since it is better to assign different number of bits depending on the entropy of the data. Graphics texture data is rigidly organized into two-dimensional arrays, so there are no practical ways to change the number of bits, except between different textures. On the other hand, there is flexibility in rearranging 3DGS primitives, because their visual appearance is solely defined by their parameters. In fact, in the original rendering method, primitives must be sorted according to distance to camera in order to use the alpha blending of eq. (6). We exploit this property to improve compression, reorga-nizing parameters from a variable number of 3DGS primitives to data blocks that are compressed to a fixed number of bits. This way, we can vary the number of bits per primitive without changing the number of bits per block. To enable efficient random access, data from different types of arrangements are put together into different bitstream, as shown in Figure 6. There is a great deal of flexibility in implementing this technique, since there is a very large number of ways to vary the number of primitives and the way their parameters are put together into blocks that are coded with a fixed number of bits. For example, a straightforward way to compress the 16 RBG vectors with 3DGS spherical harmonic parameters is to reorga-nize them in 4 × 4 RGB blocks, as shown in Figure 8, and use a vector quantization method like Block Truncation Coding for compression. Alternatively, for better compression we can exploit the similarity between the same type of parameters from different primitives by putting them together into blocks. For instance, it is possible to rearrange spherical harmonic RGB data from four primitives into four 4×4 RGB blocks, as shown in Fig. 13. While the number of bits per primitive used in the schemes of Fig. 13 and in Fig. 14 is the same, it is important to consider that the encoder can choose primitives with similar RGB vectors to share blocks such that, when using a vector quantization methods like BTC, reduces the reproduction error (compression distortion). Another property that can be exploited is the fact that spher-ical harmonic coefficients are used to model view-dependent color, which may not be important in a large fraction of primitives. Commonly those parameters are represented with very small values, which can be converted to zero with little view quality degradation. In those cases, we can define different bitstreams to primi-tives that use a reduced number of nonzero spherical harmonic RGB vectors. Fig. 15 shows an example of how a set of 16 RGB vectors from four primitives can be encoded using a single 4 × 4 RGB block, and Fig. 16 shows an example where single RGB vectors from 16 primitives are encoded using a 

4 × 4 RGB block The examples described above demonstrate that, by orga-nizing data from multiple parameters, it is possible to improve compression by varying the number of bits per primitive, or better exploiting similarities between primitive parameters, even when using the same number of bits. The 4 × 4 RGB blocks are commonly used in the BCx texture compression formats [11], but this type of SH coef-ficient rearrangement scheme can be extended to any form of compression based on Block Truncation Coding, or vector quantization. V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

A. Experimental setup 

As explained in Section II, each 3GS primitive has 10 pa-rameters representing opacity, position, and shape. In the experiments those were left uncompressed, and stored in 32-bit floating-point numbers. The texture compression was applied only to the spherical harmonic coefficients. This simplifies the analysis of results, to evaluate the effects of the RGB spherical harmonic coefficients compression with graphics texture coding methods. Thus, data to be compressed corresponds to spherical har-monic coefficients ˜H, that are pre-multiplied by primitive opacity as defined by eq. (9). To match the input image format of most texture compression methods, the first step before compression is to quantize floating-point values to 8-bit integer RGB components. While the 3DGS learning process can be easily modified to produce values that regularly scaled for quantization and can be easily compressed, with minimal loss in reproduction quality, this is not used in the official 3DGS implementa-tion [16]. Thus, some adjustments were needed to employ the well-known official 3DGS scene representations as reference. Our solution was to first scan, for each scene, all the SH coefficients, and find the 16 scaling factors such that, after normalization, 99.5% of coefficients are in the interval [-0.5,0.5]. The those normalized SH coefficients are scaled and quantized to integers between 0 and 255 for compression. After quantization the SH coefficients were organized into 

512 × 512 RGB images and compressed using the well-known 

compressonator texture compression software [17] to generate files in dds format. Then images were decompressed with the same software, and their pixels were converted back to corresponding spherical harmonic coefficients. The BC1 and BC7 texture compression methods were used, with BC1 option 

-RefineSteps 2 , and BC7 option -Quality 0.2 .Two versions of each scene were created before quantization and compression. The first maintains the original sequence of primitives when generating images for texture compression. The second version has the primitives sorted according to the color of the first (diffuse) SH coefficient, using the method described in Section III-C and illustrated in Fig. 8. Next, 3DGS scene views were rendered with the model using the decompressed data, and the resulting images were compared to the corresponding images rendered using the original 32-bit floating-point parameters, to obtain peak-signal-to-noise-ratios (PSNR). The final PSNR is the average over 25 views used for testing in [1], which correspond to camera positions from the learning set. 

B. Results and conclusions 

Data from 3DGS scenes bicycle , bonsai and garden was downloaded from the official 3DGS implementation site [16], and used for all experiments. The PSNR results are shown in Table I, where the column SH bytes represents the number of bytes used to encode the 48 SH coefficients per primitive. Note that BC1 compresses 4 × 4 RGB blocks to 8 bytes, and BC7 to 16 bytes. Different combinations using more than one primitive results in different averages per primitive. We can observe in the second row of PSNR results in Table I that, even without changing the learning loss function, with proper scaling there is practically no visual loss when SH coefficients are only quantized to 8 bits. The next two rows shows the results of using the simplest rearrangement scheme, shown in Fig. 13, where all 16 SH coefficients are packed into 4 × 4 blocks. BC1 application results in significant quality degradation, and while results from BC7 are significantly better, the reproduction quality is still low. This can be explained by the fact that the first SH coef-ficient, representing diffuse appearance, can be quite differ-ent from the remaining coefficient representing the specular effects, and thus cannot be well-represented with the BTC method discussed in Section III-A. The following two rows of results in were obtained using the rearrangement shown in Fig. 14. There is a significant 1 primitive 

> Spherical harmonics RGB
> 4×4RGB block

Fig. 13. Rearrangement of 16 RGB vectors from one 3DGS primitive to one 4 × 4 RGB block. 4 primitives 

> Spherical harmonics RGB
> 4×4 RGB blocks

Fig. 14. Rearrangement of 64 RGB vectors from four 3DGS primitives to four 4 × 4 RGB blocks. 4 primitives  

> Spherical harmonics RGB 4×4RGB block

Fig. 15. Rearrangement of 16 RGB vectors from four 3DGS primitives to one 4 × 4 RGB block, when higher order SH coefficients are all zeros. 16 primitives 

> Spherical harmonics RGB
> 4×4RGB blocks
> Zero-order spherical harmonics RGB Shared higher-order spherical harmonics RGB

Fig. 16. Rearrangement of 16 RGB vectors from 16 3DGS primitives to one or more 4 × 4 RGB blocks, depending on the number of nonzero blocks. TABLE I COMPRESSION EVALUATION ON SELECTED 3DGS SCENES .Average PSNR (dB) SH Method Bicycle Bonsai Garden bytes 

∞ ∞ ∞ 196 32-bit floating point 46.20 50.17 48.92 48 SH coeff. quantized to 8 bits 23.37 24.81 20.11 8 BC1 on 16 SH coeff. packed in 4 × 4 blocks 30.22 34.50 29.09 16 BC7 on 16 SH coeff. packed in 4 × 4 blocks 30.73 31.88 29.86 10 BC7 on 4 first SH coeff., BC1 on remaining (original) 35.03 38.39 35.36 10 BC7 on 4 first SH coeff., BC1 on remaining (sorted) 24.44 22.70 22.86 8.5 BC1 on all 4 × 4 SH coeff. blocks (original) 36.08 38.77 36.66 8.5 BC1 on all 4 × 4 SH coeff. blocks (sorted) 31.53 29.84 29.34 9 BC7 on 4 × 4 first SH coeff., BC1 on remaining (original) 38.13 40.20 38.09 9 BC7 on 4 × 4 first SH coeff., BC1 on remaining (sorted) 32.36 30.07 29.86 17 BC7 on all 4 × 4 SH coeff. blocks (original) 43.17 45.55 43.87 17 BC7 on all 4 × 4 SH coeff. blocks (sorted) improvement in quality because BC7 uses 16 bytes per block, and also supports more than one quantization segment (refer-ence vector pairs) per block, potentially using separate vector quantization for the diffuse and specular coefficients. In this arrangement we start to observe the advantages of sorting by color for BTC compression, resulting in 4.3, 6.5, and 5.5 dB PSNR improvements in the three tested scenes. The last six rows of PSNR results in Table I were obtained using the rearrangement of Fig. 16, employing 16 4 × 4 RGB blocks, with each block containing SH coefficients of the same order from 16 3DGS primitives. The first two of those rows show that the first SH coeffi-cients (diffuse components) are very important for rendering quality, so that when they are coded together after color sorting PSNR improvements increase to 11.6, 16.1 and 13.8 dB, resulting in much better quality from BC1 compression. This is confirmed with the results in the following two rows, that show that visually lossless compression can be achieved with slight increase in bytes per primitive by using BC7 in the first block and BC1 in the remaining 15. Finally, the last two rows show that, while using BC7 in all blocks yields the highest quality, it requires nearly doubling the number of bytes. Fig. 17 shows some examples of views rendered after using the proposed compression. The compression scheme used for those example is based on the rearrangement of Fig. 14, with BC7 applied to the first block and BC1 to the remaining 3 blocks. It was chosen because its quality is sufficiently low to enable seeing some difference on side-by-side image comparisons. In other cases, it is much harder or impossible to visualize differences. We can observe that the most visible compression-related distortion is in color appearance. However, since 3DGS prim-itives have very smooth boundaries, artifacts caused by color quantization do not create abrupt transitions, and are hard to identify. The same was observed in videos generated by moving camera position: all 3D features are preserved, and the most visible differences are in color. REFERENCES [1] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨ uhler, and George Drettakis, “3D Gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” 

ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 42, no. 4, July 2023. [2] Matthias Zwicker, Hanspeter Pfister, Jeroen Van Baar, and Markus Gross, “Ewa splatting,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 223–238, 2002. [3] Tong Wu, Yu-Jie Yuan, Ling-Xiao Zhang, Jie Yang, Yan-Pei Cao, Ling-Qi Yan, and Lin Gao, “Recent advances in 3D Gaussian Splatting,” 

Computational Visual Media , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 613–642, 2024. [4] Ben Fei, Jingyi Xu, Rui Zhang, Qingyuan Zhou, Weidong Yang, and Ying He, “3D Gaussian Splatting as a new era: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 4429–4449, 2025. [5] Yanqi Bao, Tianyu Ding, Jing Huo, Yaoli Liu, Yuxin Li, Wenbin Li, Yang Gao, and Jiebo Luo, “3D Gaussian Splatting: Survey, technologies, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 6832–6852, 2025. [6] Guikun Chen and Wenguan Wang, “A survey on 3D Gaussian Splatting,” 

ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 58, no. 12, May 2026. [7] Milena Bagdasarian, Paul Knoll, Yi-Hsin Li, Florian Barthel, Anna Hilsmann, Peter Eisert, and Wieland, “3DGS.zip: A survey on 3D Gaussian Splatting compression methods (GitHub website),” https://w-m.github.io/3dgs-compression-survey/, 2025. [8] Milena Bagdasarian, Paul Knoll, Yi-Hsin Li, Florian Barthel, Anna Hilsmann, Peter Eisert, and Wieland Morgenstern, “3DGS.zip: A survey on 3D Gaussian Splatting compression methods,” Computer Graphics Forum , vol. 44, no. 2, pp. e70078, 2025. [9] Muhammad Salman Ali, Chaoning Zhang, Marco Cagnazzo, Giuseppe Valenzise, Enzo Tartaglione, and Sung-Ho Bae, “Compression in 3D Gaussian Splatting: A survey of methods, trends, and future directions,” 

IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , pp. 1–1, 2026. [10] J¨ orn Nystad, Anders Lassen, Andy Pomianowski, Sean Ellis, and Tom Olson, “Adaptive scalable texture compression,” in Proceed-ings of the Fourth ACM SIGGRAPH / Eurographics Conference on High-Performance Graphics , Goslar, DEU, 2012, EGGH-HPG’12, p. 105–114, Eurographics Association. [11] Microsoft Corp., “Texture block compression in Direct3D 11,” https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3d11/texture-block-compression-in-direct3d-11, 2020. [12] E. Delp and O. Mitchell, “Image compression using block truncation coding,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 1335–1342, 1979. [13] Takio Kurita and Nobuyuki Otsu, “A method of block truncation coding for color image compression,” IEEE transactions on communications ,vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 1270–1274, 1993. [14] Zhou Hong, Konstantine I Iourcha, and Krishna S Nayak, “Fixed-rate block-based image compression with inferred pixel values,” Aug. 10 2004, US Patent 6,775,417. [15] Andreas Meuleman, Ishaan Shah, Alexandre Lanvin, Bernhard Kerbl, and George Drettakis, “On-the-fly reconstruction for large-scale novel view synthesis from unposed images,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 44, no. 4, July 2025. [16] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨ uhler, and George Drettakis, “3D Gaussian Splatting for real-time radiance field rendering – official implementation,” https://github.com/graphdeco-inria/gaussian-splatting, 2023. [17] Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), “Compressonator texture compression SDK,” https://gpuopen.com/compressonator/, 2024. (a) Reference (b) Original order (c) Color-based order Fig. 17. Comparisons of views generated from 3DGS scenes after compressing the 16 SH coefficients to 10 bytes per primitive. (a) Reference view rendered using the original 32-bit floating-point SH coefficients; (b) View rendered after decompressing the 16 SH coefficients to 10 bytes, without changing the order of primitives; (c) Same compression as (b), but rerdering SH coefficients according to RGB vectors.