Title: Sketch2CT: Multimodal Diffusion for Structure-Aware 3D Medical Volume Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.22509v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 00:11:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Sketch2CT: Multimodal Diffusion for Structure-Aware 3D Medical Volume Generation 

## Delin An and Chaoli Wang University of Notre Dame 

{dan3, chaoli.wang }@nd.edu S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 

CHAOS liver (CT) 

> mask  sketch

AVT aorta (CT) 

Decathlon liver (CT) Decathlon heart (MRI) 

> label image  label image
> label image label image
> text  liver
> shape
> topology
> { }
> liver
> shape
> topology
> { }
> mask  sketch text
> mask  sketch text  aorta
> shape
> topology
> { }
> mask  sketch text  heart
> shape
> topology
> { }

Figure 1. Multimodal sketch and text guided 3D medical image generation results from our Sketch2CT method. For each organ, a user-provided sketch and text description serve as structural and semantic conditions. Sketch2CT produces both a 3D segmentation mask and a synthesized medical volume that closely follows the geometry and anatomy implied by the input. S1-S7 denote seven consecutive axial slices from the synthesized 3D volume, illustrating spatial continuity. 

## Abstract 

Diffusion probabilistic models have demonstrated signif-icant potential in generating high-quality, realistic medi-cal images, providing a promising solution to the persis-tent challenge of data scarcity in the medical field. Nev-ertheless, producing 3D medical volumes with anatomi-cally consistent structures under multimodal conditions re-mains a complex and unresolved problem. We introduce Sketch2CT, a multimodal diffusion framework for structure-aware 3D medical volume generation, jointly guided by a user-provided 2D sketch and a textual description that captures 3D geometric semantics. The framework initially generates 3D segmentation masks of the target organ from random noise, conditioned on both modalities. To effec-tively align and fuse these inputs, we propose two key modules that refine sketch features with localized textual cues and integrate global sketch-text representations. Built upon a capsule-attention backbone, these modules lever-age the complementary strengths of sketches and text to produce anatomically accurate organ shapes. The synthe-sized segmentation masks subsequently guide a latent dif-fusion model for 3D CT volume synthesis, enabling real-istic reconstruction of organ appearances that are consis-tent with user-defined sketches and descriptions. Exten-sive experiments on public CT datasets demonstrate that Sketch2CT achieves superior performance in generating multimodal medical volumes. Its controllable, low-cost generation pipeline enables principled, efficient augmen-tation of medical datasets. Code is available at https: //github.com/adlsn/Sketch2CT .

## 1. Introduction 

Medical image synthesis has become a pivotal research field aimed at overcoming the challenge of data scarcity in medical imaging. In contrast to natural images, col-lecting large-scale, high-quality, and well-annotated medi-cal datasets is hindered by privacy restrictions, significant acquisition costs, and dependence on expert annotations. Meanwhile, deep learning models, which underpin recent breakthroughs in medical image analysis tasks such as seg-mentation [3, 4, 14, 56], classification [8, 12], anomaly de-

> arXiv:2603.22509v1 [cs.CV] 23 Mar 2026

tection [37, 55, 58], registration [9, 46], and cross-modality translation [30], require large volumes of labeled data for optimal performance. Thus, generating realistic and diverse synthetic medical images presents a promising avenue for enhancing model generalizability and robustness under lim-ited data conditions. Generative models, including generative adversarial net-works (GANs) [19] and denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [25], have achieved significant progress in image synthesis [26], inpainting [27], and super-resolution [15]. Among these, diffusion models have gar-nered particular attention for their exceptional image qual-ity, robust training, and strong capacity to represent com-plex data distributions. Conditional diffusion models [47] further enhance controllability by incorporating auxiliary modalities, such as text descriptions [11, 42], segmentation masks [29], or sketches [33, 43, 64], to guide generation across images, videos, and 3D point clouds. Building on their success in natural image domains, diffusion-based ap-proaches have been adopted in medical imaging to help ad-dress the challenge of limited data. Diffusion-based medical image synthesis can be catego-rized into 2D and 3D approaches, depending on the dimen-sionality of the generated data. 2D diffusion models [18] commonly produce individual image slices (e.g., CT or MRI), delivering visually realistic results but often failing to ensure anatomical continuity between adjacent slices. To improve realism, segmentation-guided 2D models [29] in-corporate anatomical priors, enhancing local accuracy but still lacking global inter-slice consistency for full 3D vol-ume reconstruction. Conversely, 3D diffusion models di-rectly generate volumetric data to preserve spatial coher-ence; however, they require significant computational re-sources, limiting both achievable resolution and the scala-bility of the training process. Conditioning on 3D segmen-tation masks can enhance anatomical plausibility, although it introduces complexity and may destabilize the training process. Recently, latent diffusion models [36, 54, 63] have emerged as a promising alternative by conducting the diffu-sion process in a compressed latent space, reducing compu-tational costs while retaining high fidelity. While unconditional diffusion models are valuable for general data augmentation, generating paired image-annotation data through conditional diffusion is essential for downstream medical image analysis tasks [5, 22, 31, 45, 51]. Segmentation-guided diffusion frameworks [2, 13, 29] have demonstrated strong results for medical image synthe-sis; however, they are constrained by their reliance on pre-defined segmentation masks, which limit both the diversity and controllability of the output. To address segmentation availability constraints, methods such as MedGen3D [24] employ a two-stage pipeline in which random segmenta-tion masks are generated before synthesizing correspond-ing medical volumes; however, the inherent randomness of these masks limits structural control. To overcome these challenges, namely, (1) insufficient inter-slice consistency in 2D methods, (2) the high com-putational demands of full 3D diffusion, and (3) the lim-ited controllability of current conditional models, we in-troduce Sketch2CT, a multimodal diffusion framework for structure-aware 3D medical volume generation. Sketch2CT comprises two stages: (1) a sketch-and-text conditioned la-tent diffusion model that produces anatomically consistent 3D segmentation masks from user-provided sketches and textual descriptions, and (2) a segmentation-conditioned la-tent diffusion model that synthesizes high-quality 3D CT volumes based on the generated masks. In our approach, sketches serve as an intuitive structural blueprint of the tar-get anatomy, while textual descriptions provide comple-mentary semantic and geometric details not captured by sketches alone. The fusion of these modalities enables the controllable, structure-preserving generation of realistic 3D medical volumes, as illustrated in Figure 1. The principal contributions of this work are as follows: • We effectively capture both local structural informa-tion from sketches and contextual semantics from text, thereby enhancing the model’s attention to anatomically meaningful regions during segmentation generation. • We jointly fuse multimodal representations from local and global perspectives, thereby facilitating deep interac-tion between the sketch and text modalities and improv-ing structural fidelity. • We enable low-cost, user-crafted sketches and text de-scriptions to generate high-quality, anatomically coherent 3D CT volumes, providing a practical, controllable solu-tion for data augmentation. 

## 2. Related Work 

Generative models for natural image synthesis. Gener-ative models can be broadly categorized into two major branches: GANs and diffusion models. GANs learn a map-ping from a latent noise distribution to the target data dis-tribution through an adversarial game between a generator and a discriminator, and have achieved remarkable success in early image synthesis tasks. However, they often suf-fer from training instability and mode collapse, which lim-its the diversity and fidelity of the generated samples [32]. Diffusion models have recently emerged as a more sta-ble and expressive alternative, formulating data generation as the reversal of a gradual noising process. They have demonstrated superior image quality, robustness in train-ing, and diversity compared to GANs. In the natural im-age domain, diffusion models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in 2D image generation and have been ex-tended to conditional generation by introducing auxiliary modalities such as text, segmentation maps, or sketches to control the synthesis process. Furthermore, several stud-ies [16, 21, 34, 53] have explored generating 3D data from 2D or multimodal conditions, enabling geometry-aware synthesis and reconstruction. For instance, Wu et al. [57] proposed a sketch- and text-conditioned diffusion frame-work to generate colored 3D point clouds, demonstrating the effectiveness of combining coarse structural priors with semantic information. 

Medical image synthesis with generative models. Com-pared to the extensive research on natural image generation, diffusion-based medical image synthesis remains underex-plored. Most existing studies [1, 10, 23, 50, 61] focus on 2D slice-level synthesis, where diffusion models generate large numbers of CT or MRI slices with considerable diversity. However, the lack of inter-slice consistency and anatomi-cal plausibility limits their usability for data augmentation and downstream analysis. A common strategy to improve anatomical realism is to incorporate explicit anatomical pri-ors, such as segmentation masks, to guide the synthesis process. Following this idea, Wang et al. [54] employed pretrained latent diffusion models to generate medical im-ages conditioned on segmentation maps, and Zhang et al. [63] proposed ControlNet to enable conditional 2D image generation. Although these methods demonstrate the ben-efits of conditioning, they are primarily designed for nat-ural images and do not adapt well to medical data. Konz et al. [29] designed a segmentation-guided diffusion model (Seg-Diff) to synthesize medical images from segmenta-tion masks, showing that the synthetic data can improve the performance of segmentation networks. Nevertheless, 2D-based approaches still struggle to maintain inter-slice conti-nuity and cannot generate segmentation masks themselves. To enhance controllability and data diversity, some stud-ies generate segmentation masks as an intermediate step be-fore image synthesis. For instance, Guibas et al. [20] used a dual-GAN architecture to produce 2D segmentation masks for retinal image generation, and Fernandes et al. [18] gen-erated brain MRI images conditioned on masks from two coordinated generators. For volumetric synthesis, Subrama-niam et al. [48] employed a Wasserstein GAN [7] to jointly generate 3D patches and their corresponding masks, which improves spatial coherence. However, the high computa-tional cost of full 3D diffusion models makes large-scale volume synthesis challenging, particularly when incorpo-rating 3D segmentation masks as structural priors. Han et al. [24] addressed this issue with MedGen3D, a multi-conditional diffusion framework that generates both 3D seg-mentation masks and medical volumes. Their approach first synthesizes sub-volumes and subsequently infers the com-plete volume from the generated regions, partially mitigat-ing computational overhead. 

Multimodal and structure-aware generation. Existing medical image synthesis approaches largely focus on ei-ther 2D image generation or 3D volume synthesis condi-tioned on segmentation masks. With the success of condi-tional diffusion models in computer vision, recent research has begun to incorporate multimodal guidance, such as text, sketches, or multimodal imaging, to enhance controllabil-ity and interpretability. For text-based generation, Xu et al. [60] proposed AttnGAN, and Zhang et al. [62] intro-duced StackGAN to synthesize images from textual de-scriptions through multi-stage refinement. In 3D recon-struction, image-based conditioning is widely used to re-cover 3D shapes from single or multi-view images [52], such as Pix2Vox++ [59] and Pixel2Mesh [53]. When im-age conditions are unavailable, sketches serve as an efficient and intuitive structural input. Guillard et al. [21] utilized sketches to refine object shapes, and Zhang et al. [64] re-constructed 3D models from single-view sketches. Recent works further demonstrate that combining sketches with text provides complementary information: sketches encode coarse geometry, while text conveys semantics and fine-grained details. For example, Wu et al. [57] employed cap-sule attention [40] to jointly process sketch and text features for controllable 3D point cloud generation. Inspired by these advances, we aim to leverage multi-modal information to guide the generation of 3D medical volumes. In particular, sketches offer intuitive structural guidance of the target anatomy, while text provides comple-mentary semantic and morphological context. As diffusion models have proven superior to GANs in terms of image fi-delity and stability, we adopt them as the backbone of our framework. We also employ a latent diffusion formulation that enables high-resolution 3D generation in a compressed latent space, thereby balancing efficiency and quality. Al-though latent compression may lose some fine-scale details, ensuring globally consistent and anatomically plausible 3D structure is more critical for medical image analysis tasks. To the best of our knowledge, Sketch2CT is the first frame-work to explore multimodal (sketch and text) diffusion for structure-aware 3D medical volume generation. 

## 3. Sketch2CT 

As shown in Figure 2, our Sketch2CT framework comprises two primary components: segmentation mask generation 

and medical volume generation . The first component is designed to synthesize 3D segmentation masks, conditioned on both sketches and textual descriptions. This stage in-cludes four key modules: (1) sketch extraction , capturing the anatomical structure’s outline; (2) text acquisition , pro-viding complementary 3D semantic details; (3) sketch-text feature fusion , aligning structural and contextual informa-tion; and (4) segmentation latent diffusion , which gener-ates a coherent 3D segmentation mask. The second com-ponent synthesizes realistic 3D medical volumes by condi-tioning a latent diffusion model on the segmentation repre-(a) sketch & text fusion 

(b) segmentation generation  

> The organ’s
> geometrical
> description:
> ……
> sketch
> text
> capsule
> encoder
> sentence
> transformer
> useful useless
> sketch features
> text features
> FiLM fusion

(c) medical volume generation    

> fused
> features
> cross
> attention
> module
> self
> attention
> module
> noise
> Eseg
> Dseg
> latent di ff usion
> model
> noise
> addition
> TSFE CGFM
> cross
> attention
> segmentation
> latent
> segmentation
> latent mask
> noise
> Eimg
> Dimg
> latent di ff usion
> model
> image
> latent
> image
> latent
> concatenation
> …
> medical
> volume mask
> …
> noise
> addition

Figure 2. Overview of our Sketch2CT framework. (a) A capsule-based sketch encoder and a sentence transformer extract structural and semantic features, which are fused via a FiLM module. (b) The fused representation conditions a segmentation latent diffusion model to generate 3D organ masks. (c) The predicted segmentation latent guides an image latent diffusion model to synthesize 3D medical volumes. 

sentation. The detailed design and implementation of each module are described in the following subsections. 

3.1. Sketch Extraction 

To provide intuitive and structure-aware guidance for gen-eration, we first extract 2D sketches from 3D anatomi-cal segmentations. The objective is to obtain representa-tive contour depictions that capture the characteristic shape and boundary geometry of each organ, while keeping the sketches lightweight, abstract, and easily interpretable for user interaction. We begin by visualizing the 3D seg-mentation masks in a medical imaging environment ( 3D Slicer [17]) to obtain surface representations of the target anatomy. For volumetric organs such as liver and heart, 2D projections are captured along the axial (transverse) 

direction, which corresponds to the standard clinical view-ing plane and effectively reveals the organ’s overall mor-phology. For elongated, tubular structures such as the aorta, projections are instead taken along the sagittal (longitudi-nal) plane, which aligns with the vessel’s principal axis and better preserves its continuous geometry. The rendered projections are subsequently transformed into sketches through a sequence of image-processing op-erations that emphasize structural boundaries while sup-pressing texture and shading. Specifically, we employ the 

PyVista [49] library to render high-contrast surface pro-jections with controlled lighting and orthogonal camera views, ensuring clear structural outlines. The rendered im-ages are then processed using OpenCV operations, includ-ing grayscale conversion, histogram equalization for con-trast enhancement, bilateral filtering for edge-preserving smoothing, and Canny-based edge detection to extract salient contours. The resulting binary edge maps are re-fined using morphological operations to yield clean, contin-uous sketches that delineate the organ boundaries. Through adjusting parameters such as edge detection thresholds and filtering kernel sizes, we can control the level of detail and abstraction in the sketches. These anatomy-aware sketches provide geometry-centric structural priors that condition the subsequent segmentation diffusion model. 

3.2. Text Acquisition 

Although sketches offer intuitive 2D structural information, they inherently lack depth and volumetric context, making it difficult to reconstruct a complete 3D segmentation mask from a single projection. Obtaining sketches from multiple views could mitigate this limitation, but would substantially increase user effort and compromise practical usability. To balance expressiveness with simplicity, we introduce text descriptions as a complementary modality to enhance the spatial context that sketches alone cannot provide. To construct these textual representations, we first gen-erate a series of 2D snapshots for each segmentation mask along the three principal anatomical axes: axial, coronal, and sagittal. These projections highlight different facets of the organ’s morphology and serve as comprehensive visual references for its 3D structure. Simultaneously, we calcu-late a suite of physical and geometric metrics from the seg-mentation mask, such as volume, surface area, principal-axis lengths, maximum and minimum diameters, spheric-ity, compactness, and, when applicable, centerline length. Together, these quantitative attributes succinctly character-ize the organ’s overall shape, size, and spatial proportions. During training, textual descriptions are generated automat-ically from this visual and geometric information to serve as textual conditions. At inference time, however, users can freely edit or provide custom text descriptions, en-abling flexible, interactive control over the generation pro-cess without requiring reference segmentations. The snapshots and geometric metrics are provided to-gether as prompts to a large language model (LLM) special-ized in visual-language understanding (GPT-4o-mini, Ope-nAI) [65]. The model is directed to serve as an expert ge-ometric describer, generating a structured textual summary of the organ’s shape characteristics, including global form, surface smoothness, symmetry, and topological continuity, while explicitly excluding any diagnostic or clinical con-text. The generated output is a structured JSON descrip-tion that retains only geometry-related information. This approach ensures the resulting text focuses solely on spatial and morphological features, treating the segmentation as a generic 3D object; thus, domain-specific medical LLMs are unnecessary. Finally, the textual descriptions are transformed into high-dimensional embeddings via a pretrained sentence transformer [39], capturing both global semantics and fine-grained geometric relationships conveyed in the text. These embeddings serve as textual conditioning features for the subsequent sketch-text fusion and segmentation-diffusion stages. By complementing sketch-based structural infor-mation with semantic representations of 3D geometry, the text modality enables more consistent, spatially aware mask generation. 

3.3. Sketch-Text Feature Fusion 

Although sketches provide an intuitive and compact repre-sentation of organ structure, their sparse, edge-only nature makes it challenging to extract stable, discriminative fea-tures for downstream 3D generation. Unlike natural im-ages, medical sketches contain limited texture and shad-ing details, and the relevant anatomical boundaries are of-ten discontinuous or faint due to projection or noise. Di-rectly encoding such sparse inputs with convolutional back-bones can therefore lead to feature ambiguity and loss of structural cues. To address these challenges, we design two complementary modules for multimodal fusion: a text-enhanced sketch feature extractor (TSFE) for local text-guided refinement, and a cross-modal global fusion mod-ule (CGFM) for global semantic alignment between sketch and text. TSFE aims to enrich the sparse sketch representation with semantic priors derived from textual descriptions. The sketch image is first encoded into a capsule-based embed-ding fs ∈ Rds using a convolutional backbone followed by primary capsules and attention-based routing, while the textual description is embedded as ft ∈ Rdt using a pre-trained sentence transformer. To adaptively modulate the sketch embedding, we employ a feature-wise linear modu-lation (FiLM) [35] mechanism that generates scale and shift parameters from the text embedding 

γ, β = g(ft), (1) where g(·) denotes a lightweight projection network. The text-enhanced sketch feature is then obtained as 

˜fs = γ ⊙ fs + β, (2) with ⊙ indicating element-wise multiplication. This text-guided modulation adaptively amplifies semantically rele-vant channels and suppresses irrelevant ones, producing a more informative and stable sketch embedding. To achieve global semantic alignment and joint reason-ing across modalities, we introduce a two-level attention mechanism for the CGFM, comprising text-guided cross-attention and sketch-guided self-attention. Given the en-hanced sketch features ˜fs and the text embedding ft, the cross-attention stage integrates fine-grained semantic fea-tures 

Flocal = Attention( ˜fs, ft, ft), (3) capturing localized correspondences between sketch con-tours and textual semantics. Subsequently, the self-attention stage aggregates these responses to form a global represen-tation 

Fglobal = SelfAttn( Flocal ), (4) which summarizes the organ’s overall geometry and seman-tics. Finally, both representations are concatenated and pro-jected to yield the joint multimodal feature 

zfusion = Proj  [Flocal ∥ Fglobal ], (5) which serves as the conditioning input for the segmentation latent diffusion model. Together, TSFE enhances the sparse sketch representa-tion through text-driven channel modulation, while CGFM aligns global semantics via hierarchical attention. This two-stage fusion effectively bridges the modality gap, yielding a robust, geometry-aware multimodal embedding for gener-ating anatomically consistent segmentations. 

3.4. Segmentation Latent Diffusion 

Under the multimodal conditions provided by the fused sketch-text representation, we aim to generate anatomically coherent 3D segmentation masks using a latent diffusion framework. Directly performing diffusion in voxel space is computationally demanding and memory-intensive for volumetric data. To address this, we use the 3D Autoen-coderKL function from MONAI to project segmentation masks into a compact latent space, enabling efficient dif-fusion while preserving essential anatomical structures. Formally, given a ground-truth segmentation volume x0,the autoencoder encodes it into a latent representation z0 =

Eseg (x0) and reconstructs it as ˆx0 = Dseg (z0). During training, the latent diffusion model learns a parameterized denoising process that progressively reconstructs z0 from Gaussian noise zT ∼ N (0 , I) across T timesteps. At each timestep t, the forward diffusion process adds Gaussian noise according to 

q(zt | zt−1) = N  √αt zt−1, (1 − αt)I, (6) where {αt}Tt=1 defines a variance schedule controlling the noise intensity. The reverse process is learned through a UNet-based denoising network ϵθ conditioned on the mul-timodal feature zfusion 

pθ (zt−1 | zt, zfusion ) = N  μθ (zt, t, zfusion ), σ 2 

> t

I, (7) where μθ and σt are learned mean and variance terms, and the conditioning is injected via cross-attention at multiple layers of the UNet. Following the v-prediction parameterization [41], the network is trained to predict the velocity term 

vt = √αt ϵ − √1 − αt z0, (8) where ϵ denotes the Gaussian noise added at step t. The training objective minimizes the mean squared error be-tween the predicted and target velocities 

Ldiff = Et, z0, ϵ

∥ϵθ (zt, t, zfusion ) − vt∥22

. (9) During inference, random latent noise is iteratively de-noised through the learned reverse process, guided by the sketch–text condition zfusion , to produce a clean segmenta-tion latent ˆz0. The pretrained autoencoder subsequently de-codes this latent to yield the final 3D segmentation mask 

ˆx0 = D(ˆ z0).By operating in the latent space and leveraging cross-modal conditioning, Sketch2CT efficiently synthesizes anatomically consistent segmentation masks that reflect both the structural constraints of the sketch and the semantic guidance of the text. 

3.5. Conditional Medical Volume Generation 

The final stage of Sketch2CT synthesizes 3D medical vol-umes conditioned on the generated segmentation struc-ture. While the segmentation diffusion model reconstructs anatomical geometry, this stage translates the structural rep-resentation into corresponding image appearances, thereby bridging the gap between geometry and texture. To achieve this, we adopt a latent diffusion formulation similar to Sec-tion 3.4 but extend it to incorporate the segmentation latent as a structural prior. Specifically, the segmentation mask ˆxseg obtained from the previous stage is first encoded into a compact latent rep-resentation zseg = Eseg (ˆ xseg ) using a pretrained 3D Autoen-coderKL. For the medical image volume ximg , another Au-toencoderKL is trained to map the medical volume into a perceptually meaningful latent space zimg = Eimg (ximg ).During the diffusion process, the segmentation latent is concatenated with the noisy image latent at each timestep to guide the denoising trajectory 

zt−1 = ϵθ

 zt ∥ zseg , t , (10) where ∥ denotes channel-wise concatenation. This condi-tioning scheme ensures that the generated image remains anatomically aligned with the segmentation, while enabling the realistic synthesis of tissue texture. The diffusion model is trained under the v-prediction parameterization follow-ing Equation 9. During inference, random noise is itera-tively denoised under the segmentation guidance to produce a clean latent ˆzimg , which is finally decoded into the voxel domain as ˆximg = Dimg (ˆ zimg ).By conditioning the image diffusion model on the seg-mentation latent, Sketch2CT establishes a strong linkage between anatomical structure and visual realism. This de-sign enables controllable, consistent generation of medical volumes, ensuring that synthesized images exhibit natural intensity variations while faithfully preserving the geomet-ric fidelity of the generated segmentation. 

## 4. Results and Discussion 

We conduct our experiments on three public CT datasets and one MRI dataset: (1) CHAOS liver (CT) [28], which contains 20 CT scans annotated with liver; (2) AVT aorta (CT) [38], which contains 56 CT scans annotated with aorta; (3) Decathlon liver (CT) [6], which contains 131 CT scans annotated with liver; (4) Decathlon heart (MRI) [6], which contains 20 MRI scans annotated with heart. For each dataset, we adopt an 8:2 train/test split. All volumes are resampled to a unified resolution of 128 ×128 ×128 .Our Sketch2CT consists of an autoencoder and latent dif-fusion models for both segmentation and medical volume generation. The autoencoders use three resolution levels with channel widths (32 , 64 , 64) , a single residual block per level, and spatial attention only in the deepest layer. Dur-ing diffusion training, the autoencoder is frozen and serves solely as the latent encoder-decoder. The denoising back-bone is a 3D UNet provided by MONAI operating directly on the latent space. The UNet employs channel widths 

(32 , 64 , 64) with one residual block per level, and applies spatial attention at the last two levels. Cross-attention is enabled with a conditioning dimension of 1024, and one transformer layer is used at each attention-enabled level. We train the model using a DDPM scheduler with 1000 steps and v-prediction parameterization. The optimization uses Adam with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4, a batch size of 10, and mixed-precision training. The training runs for 300 epochs on an NVIDIA H200 GPU. Additional experimental details, including the ablation studies of Sketch2CT, the effects of varying sketch granu-larity on mask generation, and other analyses, are provided in the supplementary materials. 

4.1. Synthetic Image Quality Evaluation 

To quantitatively assess the quality of our synthetic im-ages, we compute two metrics: the Fr´ echet inception dis-tance (FID) and the learned perceptual image patch similar-ity (LPIPS). Following established practices, such as those used in MedGen3D, both metrics are calculated based on multi-view projections of the generated volumes. Table 1 compares Sketch2CT with three representative baselines: Med-DDPM [13], MedGen3D [24], and Seg-Diff [29]. All baselines are evaluated on a synthesized dataset con-structed from two sources: (1) sketches and text extracted from ground-truth segmentations, and (2) manually created samples—low-cost hand-drawn sketches paired with lightly refined text descriptions. For each dataset, we produce 20 such hand-crafted sketch–text pairs. Since the baselines cannot generate segmentation masks in a controlled man-ner, we use our synthesized masks as conditional inputs to ensure a fair comparison. Sketch2CT achieves the best performance on most datasets. On the challenging Decathlon heart dataset, where noise leads to higher FID and lower LPIPS for all meth-ods, Sketch2CT still surpasses all baselines by a clear mar-gin. For the CHAOS liver and AVT aorta datasets, it ex-hibits consistent gains in both fidelity and perceptual simi-larity. Seg-Diff attains the best score on the Decathlon liver dataset, likely because its larger data volume favors a 2D diffusion model. However, its results often lack axial con-tinuity. In contrast, Sketch2CT preserves full 3D spatial in-formation while achieving image quality comparable to 2D methods. CHAOS liver (CT) AVT aorta (CT) Decathlon liver (CT) Decathlon heart (MRI) method FID ↓ LPIPS ↑ FID ↓ LPIPS ↑ FID ↓ LPIPS ↑ FID ↓ LPIPS ↑                                

> Med-DDPM 114.4 0.220 119.6 0.213 115.3 0.207 128.7 0.192 MedGen3D 43.6 0.300 47.1 0.294 45.7 0.296 96.8 0.248 Seg-Diff 37.8 0.310 38.9 0.313 34.8 0.335 68.4 0.265 Sketch2CT 33.7 0.332 36.9 0.321 36.5 0.328 65.1 0.269

Table 1. Quantitative evaluation of synthetic images. We report FID (lower is better) and LPIPS (higher is better) across four datasets. Since baseline models cannot generate conditional seg-mentations, we provide synthesized masks as their inputs. 

4.2. Benefits for Segmentation 

As described in [29], we assess the quality of generated medical images by measuring how well they preserve struc-tural information relevant for segmentation. This evalua-tion criterion aligns well with our Sketch2CT framework, which explicitly generates 3D segmentation masks condi-tioned on sketch-text pairs. Then it synthesizes correspond-ing medical images, ensuring that anatomical structures are preserved throughout the process. 

Faithfulness to input masks. Table 2 reports the faith-fulness of the generated images in relation to the input masks. For each method, we run an auxiliary segmenta-tion network [29] (trained on real data) on the generated images and compute the Dice coefficient against (1) the in-put masks and (2) the segmentations predicted from the real images. Across all datasets, Sketch2CT achieves the high-est Dice scores, demonstrating that the synthesized images most faithfully preserve spatial structure. 

Downstream segmentation generalization. To evaluate the effectiveness of synthetic data, we train a segmentation network using either (1) real training images or (2) synthetic images generated by various methods, and test the models on real datasets, as shown in Table 3. Sketch2CT produces results closest to the real data baseline across all datasets, indicating that its generated images effectively replicate re-alistic anatomical details. 

4.3. Qualitative Results 

We also provide qualitative comparisons to complement the quantitative results and visually assess the anatomical plau-sibility of the synthesized segmentations and volumes. As shown in Figure 3, these examples reflect the trends ob-served in previous evaluations. For each case, we extract a sketch and a text description from the ground-truth seg-mentation to encode the organs’ geometry. We then gen-erate segmentation conditioned on these features and use it to guide the generation of medical images. We compare the synthesized results from various methods. Med-DDPM and MedGen3D often lose structural details, while Seg-Diff shows promising results for the single slice. In contrast, CHAOS liver (CT) AVT aorta (CT) Decathlon liver (CT) Decathlon heart (MRI) model Dice( mpred gen , m ) Dice( mpred gen , m pred real ) Dice( mpred gen , m ) Dice( mpred gen , m pred real ) Dice( mpred gen , m ) Dice( mpred gen , m pred real ) Dice( mpred gen , m ) Dice( mpred gen , m pred real )Med-DDPM 0.501 0.492 0.487 0.474 0.512 0.495 0.421 0.408 MedGen3D 0.814 0.797 0.842 0.828 0.821 0.803 0.612 0.587 Seg-Diff 0.827 0.809 0.866 0.861 0.892 0.873 0.638 0.601 Sketch2CT 0.868 0.852 0.894 0.887 0.912 0.904 0.642 0.614 

Table 2. Faithfulness of generated images to input masks. Dice is computed between segmentations predicted from generated images and the input masks (i.e., Dice( mpred gen , m )), and between segmentations predicted from generated images and segmentations predicted from real images (i.e., Dice( mpred gen , m pred real )). Sketch2CT consistently achieves the best fidelity across all datasets. sketch GT mask 

(3D) 

synthesized 

mask 

GT mask 

(2D) GT Med-

DDPM 

synthesized 

mask (2D) MedGen3D Seg-Diff Sketch2CT text 

> heart
> shape: irregular,
> amorphous structure
> topology: ……
> { }
> liver
> shape: wedge-shaped
> geometry
> topology: ……
> { }
> aorta
> shape: long, slender,
> and serpentine shape
> topology: ……
> { }
> liver
> shape: asymmetrical,
> elongated shape
> topology: ……
> { }

Figure 3. Qualitative comparison of baseline methods. For each case, we extract a sketch and text description from the ground-truth mask to encode organ geometry. These features guide the generation of 3D masks and the synthesis of 3D volumes. 

CHAOS liver AVT aorta Decathlon liver Decathlon heart (CT) (CT) (CT) (MRI) real training set 0.897 0.904 0.912 0.823 Med-DDPM 0.574 0.561 0.598 0.412 MedGen3D 0.814 0.801 0.823 0.681 Seg-Diff 0.826 0.812 0.887 0.702 Sketch2CT 0.893 0.889 0.904 0.711 

Table 3. Downstream segmentation performance (Dice) on real datasets. A segmentation model trained on synthetic images gener-ated by Sketch2CT achieves the closest performance to the model trained on real data, demonstrating superior anatomical realism. 

Sketch2CT produces spatially coherent shapes with more precise boundaries. 

## 5. Conclusions and Future Work 

We have presented Sketch2CT, a multimodal diffusion framework that generates structure-aware 3D medical vol-umes from sketches and textual descriptions. The frame-work comprises a segmentation generator that reconstructs anatomical structures based on multimodal inputs and a volume generator that synthesizes realistic CT appearances guided by the segmentation latent. The proposed TSFE and CGFM modules effectively align sketch and text features with 3D anatomical semantics, thereby facilitating efficient, high-fidelity reconstruction. Our experiments demonstrate that Sketch2CT enhances both image realism and data avail-ability. A key advantage of this framework is its ability to utilize low-cost, user-created sketches and simple text de-scriptions to produce anatomically coherent segmentation masks and corresponding CT volumes. This level of control yields reliable synthetic data that enhances data augmenta-tion and supports downstream segmentation tasks. How-ever, the current implementation is limited to a few or-gans and focuses exclusively on the synthesis of single or-gans. In addition, two medical imaging experts qualita-tively evaluated the generated results in terms of anatom-ical realism, structural continuity, and clinical plausibility, confirming their overall reliability. Future work will extend Sketch2CT to multi-organ generation, incorporate disease-specific sketch editing to simulate pathological variations, and conduct broader expert evaluations. 

Acknowledgments. This research was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation through grants IIS-2101696, OAC-2104158, and IIS-2401144, and the U.S. National Institutes of Health through grant 7R01HL177814-02. References 

[1] Kumar Abhishek and Ghassan Hamarneh. Mask2Lesion: Mask-constrained adversarial skin lesion image synthesis. In 

Proceedings of International Workshop on Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging , pages 71–80, 2019. 3 [2] Suhyun Ahn, Wonjung Park, Jihoon Cho, and Jinah Park. Volumetric conditioning module to control pretrained dif-fusion models for 3D medical images. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 85–95, 2025. 2 [3] Delin An, Pan Du, Pengfei Gu, Jian-Xun Wang, and Chaoli Wang. Hierarchical LoG Bayesian neural network for en-hanced aorta segmentation. In Proceedings of IEEE Interna-tional Symposium on Biomedical Imaging , pages 1–5, 2025. 1[4] Delin An, Pengfei Gu, Milan Sonka, Chaoli Wang, and Danny Z Chen. Sli2Vol+: Segmenting 3D medical images based on an object estimation guided correspondence flow network. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 3624–3634, 2025. 1 [5] Delin An, Pan Du, Jian-Xun Wang, and Chaoli Wang. AortaDiff: Volume-guided conditional diffusion models for multi-branch aortic surface generation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 32(1):922–932, 2026. 2 [6] Michela Antonelli, Annika Reinke, Spyridon Bakas, Key-van Farahani, Annette Kopp-Schneider, Bennett A. Land-man, Geert Litjens, Bjoern H. Menze, Olaf Ronneberger, Ronald M. Summers, et al. The medical segmentation de-cathlon. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05735 , 2021. 6 [7] Mart´ ın Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and L´ eon Bottou. Wasserstein GAN. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07875 , 2017. 3[8] Shekoofeh Azizi, Basil Mustafa, Fiona Ryan, Zachary Beaver, Jan Freyberg, Jonathan Deaton, Aaron Loh, Alan Karthikesalingam, Simon Kornblith, Ting Chen, Vivek Natarajan, and Mohammad Norouzi. Big self-supervised models advance medical image classification. In Proceed-ings of IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3458–3468, 2021. 1 [9] Guha Balakrishnan, Amy Zhao, Mert R. Sabuncu, John V. Guttag, and Adrian V. Dalca. VoxelMorph: A learning framework for deformable medical image registration. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 38(8):1788–1800, 2019. 2[10] Christoph Baur, Shadi Albarqouni, and Nassir Navab. MelanoGANs: High-resolution skin lesion synthesis with GANs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04338 , 2018. 3 [11] Kevin Chen, Christopher B. Choy, Manolis Savva, An-gel X. Chang, Thomas A. Funkhouser, and Silvio Savarese. Text2Shape: Generating shapes from natural language by learning joint embeddings. In Proceedings of Asian Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 100–116, 2018. 2 [12] Ana Davila, Jacinto Colan, and Yasuhisa Hasegawa. Com-parison of fine-tuning strategies for transfer learning in med-ical image classification. Image and Vision Computing , 146: 105012, 2024. 1 [13] Zolnamar Dorjsembe, Hsing-Kuo Pao, Sodtavilan Odonchimed, and Furen Xiao. Conditional diffusion models for semantic 3D brain MRI synthesis. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , 28(7):4084–4093, 2024. 2, 7 [14] Pan Du, Delin An, Chaoli Wang, and Jian-Xun Wang. AI-powered automated model construction for patient-specific CFD simulations of aortic flows. Science Advances , 11(36): eadw2825, 2025. 1 [15] Nahla M. H. Elsaid and Yu-Chien Wu. Super-resolution dif-fusion tensor imaging using SRCNN: A feasibility study. In 

Proceedings of IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Conference , pages 2830–2834, 2019. 2 [16] Haoqiang Fan, Hao Su, and Leonidas J. Guibas. A point set generation network for 3D object reconstruction from a single image. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2463– 2471, 2017. 3 [17] Andriy Fedorov, Reinhard Beichel, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, Julien Finet, Jean-Christophe Fillion-Robin, Sonia Pujol, Christian Bauer, Dominique Jennings, Fiona Fen-nessy, Milan Sonka, et al. 3D slicer as an image comput-ing platform for the quantitative imaging network. Magnetic Resonance Imaging , 30(9):1323–1341, 2012. 4 [18] Virginia Fernandez, Walter Hugo Lopez Pinaya, Pedro Borges, Petru-Daniel Tudosiu, Mark S. Graham, Tom Ver-cauteren, and M. Jorge Cardoso. Can segmentation models be trained with fully synthetically generated data? In Pro-ceedings of International Workshop on Simulation and Syn-thesis in Medical Imaging , pages 79–90, 2022. 2, 3 [19] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Com-munications of the ACM , 63(11):139–144, 2020. 2 [20] John T. Guibas, Tejpal S. Virdi, and Peter S. Li. Synthetic medical images from dual generative adversarial networks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.01872 , 2017. 3 [21] Benoˆ ıt Guillard, Edoardo Remelli, Pierre Yvernay, and Pas-cal Fua. Sketch2Mesh: Reconstructing and editing 3D shapes from sketches. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 13003–13012, 2021. 3 [22] Marija Habijan, Irena Gali´ c, Hrvoje Leventi´ c, Kreˇ simir Romi´ c, and Danilo Babin. Abdominal aortic aneurysm seg-mentation from CT images using modified 3D U-Net with deep supervision. In Proceedings of International Sympo-sium on Electronics in Marine , pages 123–128, 2020. 2 [23] Changhee Han, Hideaki Hayashi, Leonardo Rundo, Ryosuke Araki, Wataru Shimoda, Shinichi Muramatsu, Yujiro Fu-rukawa, Giancarlo Mauri, and Hideki Nakayama. GAN-based synthetic brain MR image generation. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging ,pages 734–738, 2018. 3 [24] Kun Han, Yifeng Xiong, Chenyu You, Pooya Khosravi, Shanlin Sun, Xiangyi Yan, James S. Duncan, and Xiaohui Xie. MedGen3D: A deep generative framework for paired 3D image and mask generation. In Proceedings of Interna-tional Conference on Medical Image Computing and Com-puter Assisted Interventions , pages 759–769, 2023. 2, 3, 7 [25] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020. 2 [26] Hongxu Jiang, Muhammad Imran, Linhai Ma, Teng Zhang, Yuyin Zhou, Muxuan Liang, Kuang Gong, and Wei Shao. Fast-DDPM: Fast denoising diffusion probabilistic mod-els for medical image-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14802 , 2024. 2 [27] Xuan Ju, Xian Liu, Xintao Wang, Yuxuan Bian, Ying Shan, and Qiang Xu. BrushNet: A plug-and-play image inpaint-ing model with decomposed dual-branch diffusion. In Pro-ceedings of European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 150–168, 2024. 2 [28] A. Emre Kavur, Naciye Sinem Gezer, Mustafa Baris, Sinem Aslan, Pierre-Henri Conze, Vladimir Groza, Duc Duy Pham, Soumick Chatterjee, Philipp Ernst, Savas ¨Ozkan, et al. CHAOS challenge: Combined (CT-MR) healthy abdominal organ segmentation. Medical Image Analysis , 69:101950, 2021. 6 [29] Nicholas Konz, Yuwen Chen, Haoyu Dong, and Maciej A. Mazurowski. Anatomically-controllable medical image gen-eration with segmentation-guided diffusion models. In Pro-ceedings of International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Interventions , pages 88– 98, 2024. 2, 3, 7 [30] Qing Lyu and Ge Wang. Conversion between CT and MRI images using diffusion and score-matching models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12104 , 2022. 2 [31] Andriy Myronenko, Dong Yang, Yufan He, and Daguang Xu. Aorta segmentation from 3D CT in MICCAI SEG.A. 2023 challenge. In Proceedings of International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Inter-ventions , pages 13–18, 2023. 2 [32] Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8162–8171, 2021. 2 [33] Luke Olsen, Faramarz F. Samavati, Mario Costa Sousa, and Joaquim A. Jorge. Sketch-based modeling: A survey. Com-puters & Graphics , 33(1):85–103, 2009. 2, 3 [34] Junyi Pan, Xiaoguang Han, Weikai Chen, Jiapeng Tang, and Kui Jia. Deep mesh reconstruction from single RGB im-ages via topology modification networks. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 9963–9972, 2019. 3 [35] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Du-moulin, and Aaron C. Courville. FiLM: Visual reason-ing with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 3942– 3951, 2018. 5 [36] Walter H. L. Pinaya, Petru-Daniel Tudosiu, Jessica Dafflon, Pedro F. Da Costa, Virginia Fernandez, Parashkev Nachev, S´ ebastien Ourselin, and M. Jorge Cardoso. Brain imaging generation with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of MICCAI Workshop on Deep Generative Models , pages 117– 126, 2022. 2 [37] Walter H. L. Pinaya, Petru-Daniel Tudosiu, Robert J. Gray, Geraint Rees, Parashkev Nachev, S´ ebastien Ourselin, and M. Jorge Cardoso. Unsupervised brain imaging 3D anomaly detection and segmentation with transformers. Medical Im-age Analysis , 79:102475, 2022. 2 [38] Lukas Radl, Yuan Jin, Antonio Pepe, Jianning Li, Christina Gsaxner, Fen-Hua Zhao, and Jan Egger. AVT: Multicenter aortic vessel tree CTA dataset collection with ground truth segmentation masks. Data in Brief , 40:107801, 2022. 6 [39] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sen-tence embeddings using siamese BERT-networks. In Pro-ceedings of Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing , pages 3980–3990, 2019. 5 [40] Sara Sabour, Nicholas Frosst, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Dy-namic routing between capsules. In Proceedings of Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3856–3866, 2017. 3 [41] Chitwan Saharia, Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Tim Sali-mans, David J. Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 45(4):4713– 4726, 2023. 6 [42] Aditya Sanghi, Hang Chu, Joseph G. Lambourne, Ye Wang, Chin-Yi Cheng, Marco Fumero, and Kamal Rahimi Malek-shan. CLIP-Forge: Towards zero-shot text-to-shape genera-tion. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18582–18592, 2022. 2[43] Yuefan Shen, Changgeng Zhang, Hongbo Fu, Kun Zhou, and Youyi Zheng. DeepSketchHair: Deep sketch-based 3D hair modeling. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-puter Graphics , 27(7):3250–3263, 2021. 2 [44] Hoo-Chang Shin, Neil A. Tenenholtz, Jameson K. Rogers, Christopher G. Schwarz, Matthew L. Senjem, Jeffrey L. Gunter, Katherine P. Andriole, and Mark Michalski. Med-ical image synthesis for data augmentation and anonymiza-tion using generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of MICCAI Workshop on Simulation and Synthesis in Medical Imaging , pages 1–11, 2018. 3 [45] Isaac Shiri, Giovanni Baj, Pooya Mohammadi Kazaj, Mar-ius R Bigler, Anselm W Stark, Waldo Valenzuela, Ry-ota Kakizaki, Matthias Siepe, Stephan Windecker, Lorenz R¨ aber, et al. AI-based detection and classification of anoma-lous aortic origin of coronary arteries using coronary CT angiography images. Nature Communications , 16(1):3095, 2025. 2 [46] Hanna Siebert, Christoph Großbr¨ ohmer, Lasse Hansen, and Mattias P. Heinrich. ConvexAdam: Self-configuring dual-optimization-based 3D multitask medical image registra-tion. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 44(2):738– 748, 2025. 2 [47] Vedant Singh, Surgan Jandial, Ayush Chopra, Siddharth Ramesh, Balaji Krishnamurthy, and Vineeth N. Balasub-ramanian. On conditioning the input noise for controlled image generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03859 , 2022. 2 [48] Pooja Subramaniam, Tabea Kossen, Kerstin Ritter, Anja Hennemuth, Kristian Hildebrand, Adam Hilbert, Jan Sobesky, Michelle Livne, Ivana Galinovic, Ahmed A. Khalil, Jochen B. Fiebach, Dietmar Frey, and Vince I. Madai. Gener-ating 3D TOF-MRA volumes and segmentation labels using generative adversarial networks. Medical Image Analysis ,78:102396, 2022. 3 [49] Bane Sullivan and Alex Kaszynski. PyVista: 3D plotting and mesh analysis through a streamlined interface for the visual-ization toolkit (VTK). Journal of Open Source Software , 4 (37):1450, 2019. 4 [50] Li Sun, Junxiang Chen, Yanwu Xu, Mingming Gong, Ke Yu, and Kayhan Batmanghelich. Hierarchical amortized GAN for 3D high-resolution medical image synthesis. IEEE Jour-nal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , 26(8):3966–3975, 2022. 3 [51] Theodoros P. Vagenas, Konstantinos Georgas, and George K. Matsopoulos. Deep learning-based segmentation and mesh reconstruction of the aortic vessel tree from CTA images. In 

Proceedings of International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Interventions , pages 80– 94, 2023. 2 [52] Dan Wang, Xinrui Cui, Xun Chen, Zhengxia Zou, Tianyang Shi, Septimiu E. Salcudean, Z. Jane Wang, and Rabab Ward. Multi-view 3D reconstruction with transformers. In Pro-ceedings of IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-puter Vision , pages 5702–5711, 2021. 3 [53] Nanyang Wang, Yinda Zhang, Zhuwen Li, Yanwei Fu, Wei Liu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Pixel2Mesh: Generating 3D mesh models from single RGB images. In Proceedings of Euro-pean Conference on Computer Vision , pages 55–71, 2018. 3[54] Tengfei Wang, Ting Zhang, Bo Zhang, Hao Ouyang, Dong Chen, Qifeng Chen, and Fang Wen. Pretraining is all you need for image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12952 , 2022. 2, 3 [55] Julia Wolleb, Florentin Bieder, Robin Sandk¨ uhler, and Philippe C. Cattin. Diffusion models for medical anomaly detection. In Proceedings of International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Interven-tions , pages 35–45, 2022. 2 [56] Julia Wolleb, Robin Sandk¨ uhler, Florentin Bieder, Philippe Valmaggia, and Philippe C. Cattin. Diffusion models for implicit image segmentation ensembles. In Proceedings of International Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning , pages 1336–1348, 2022. 1 [57] Zijie Wu, Yaonan Wang, Mingtao Feng, He Xie, and Ajmal Mian. Sketch and text guided diffusion model for colored point cloud generation. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision , pages 8895–8905, 2023. 3 [58] Julian Wyatt, Adam Leach, Sebastian M. Schmon, and Chris G. Willcocks. AnoDDPM: Anomaly detection with de-noising diffusion probabilistic models using simplex noise. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition Workshops , pages 649–655, 2022. 2 [59] Haozhe Xie, Hongxun Yao, Shengping Zhang, Shangchen Zhou, and Wenxiu Sun. Pix2Vox++: Multi-scale context-aware 3D object reconstruction from single and multiple im-ages. International Journal of Computer Vision , 128(12): 2919–2935, 2020. 3 [60] Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong He. AttnGAN: Fine-grained text-to-image generation with attentional generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1316–1324, 2018. 3 [61] Chenyu You, Weicheng Dai, Yifei Min, Fenglin Liu, David A. Clifton, S. Kevin Zhou, Lawrence H. Staib, and James S. Duncan. Rethinking semi-supervised medical im-age segmentation: A variance-reduction perspective. In Pro-ceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , 2023. 3 [62] Han Zhang, Tao Xu, and Hongsheng Li. StackGAN: Text-to-photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative ad-versarial networks. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pages 5908–5916, 2017. 3 [63] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In 

Proceedings of IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3813–3824, 2023. 2, 3 [64] Song-Hai Zhang, Yuan-Chen Guo, and Qing-Wen Gu. Sketch2Model: View-aware 3D modeling from single free-hand sketches. In Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6012– 6021, 2021. 2, 3 [65] Justin Zhao, Timothy Wang, Wael Abid, Geoffrey An-gus, Arnav Garg, Jeffery Kinnison, Alex Sherstinsky, Piero Molino, Travis Addair, and Devvret Rishi. LoRA Land: 310 fine-tuned LLMs that rival GPT-4, A technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00732 , 2024. 5 Sketch2CT: Multimodal Diffusion for Structure-Aware 3D Medical Volume Generation 

# Supplementary Material 

## A. Structured Semantic Text Description 

To obtain geometry-focused textual descriptions for multi-modal conditioning, we provide GPT-4o-mini with (1) three canonical 3D renderings of each organ (axial, sagittal, and coronal views), and (2) a carefully designed prompt in-structing the model to extract purely geometric informa-tion. Examples of the text descriptions are presented in Fig-ure A1. 

Prompt design. GPT-4o-mini is directed to serve as an expert in the geometric interpretation of anatomical 3D structures. The prompt emphasizes strict geometric reason-ing and forbids any clinical or physiological interpretation. In summary, the model is tasked with: • analyzing the organ’s 3D geometry using the three pro-vided views; • describing the volumetric shape, dominant axes, convex-ity, and proportions; • characterizing surface morphology, including curvature patterns, smoothness, ridges, protrusions, and indenta-tions; • assessing bilateral or rotational symmetry and quantifying asymmetry; • identifying high-level topological traits such as cavities, branching, or major geometric landmarks; and • providing additional structural features that could assist downstream geometry-aware diffusion models. The prompt explicitly limits the model to geometric and morphological observations, instructing it to avoid using medical terminology, diagnoses, clinical relevance, or bi-ological functions. The aim is to produce a text description that focuses solely on the structural characteristics of the input 3D shape. 

Output structure. GPT-4o responds with a structured description organized into the following conceptual compo-nents: • an identifier for the input organ instance; • a summary of global volumetric shape and coarse struc-tural proportions; • a characterization of surface-level geometric features; • an analysis of symmetry or asymmetry patterns; • a summary of key topological features; and • high-level geometric guidance relevant for shape-conditioned generative modeling. Although internally expressed in a structured format, we use only the distilled textual content for multimodal condi-tioning in the Sketch2CT framework. 

## B. Sketch Granularity Analysis 

To investigate how sketch detail influences the quality of generated segmentation masks, we conduct a controlled analysis using sketches derived from 2D organ snapshots. As described in the main paper, sketch contours are gen-erated using an edge-based extractor with a sensitivity pa-rameter ranging from 0 to 10. Lower values produce sparse and coarse structural outlines, while higher values generate denser sketches with fine-grained details. We select three representative parameter values across this range to create sketches with increasing levels of gran-ularity. These sketches are then input into our segmentation generation module, while maintaining consistency with all other model components and conditions. The results are shown in Figure A2. Our results reveal a clear trend: • Coarse sketches (low parameter settings) yield segmen-tation masks with smooth, global surfaces and minimal small-scale fluctuations. The generated structures faith-fully capture the overall anatomical form, with stable topology and consistent volumetric shape. • Detailed sketches (high parameter settings) introduce ad-ditional local variations, resulting in segmentation masks with slightly rougher or more irregular surface patterns. These high-detail sketches accurately capture fine contour variations and transfer them into the predicted mask. Despite the surface-level differences, the global anatom-ical fidelity remains highly consistent across various lev-els of detail. The final reconstructed 3D medical volumes derived from these segmentation masks are visually sim-ilar, and quantitative metrics indicate minimal variation across different levels of sketch detail. In particular, the Dice score between coarse and medium sketches fluctuates within 0.02 ± 0.01 . In contrast, the Dice difference between coarse and fine sketches remains similarly small at approx-imately 0.06 ± 0.02 , confirming that increased sketch detail leads to only marginal changes in segmentation quality. Considering both performance and computational effi-ciency, we recommend using sketches with low to moderate granularity. Coarse sketches offer sufficient structural guid-ance for the multimodal diffusion model while minimizing unnecessary local noise and reducing preprocessing over-head. This supports a practical use case where users can provide simple, clean sketches without compromising the quality of downstream generation. global shape: The structure forms a broad, 

horizontally oriented mass composed of two 

major volumetric lobes connected by a 

shallower central region. Its footprint is wide 

and flattened, with the dominant axes 

extending laterally. The left portion appears 

thicker and more convex, while the right 

portion displays a more elongated and 

tapered contour. 

surface characteristics: The surface exhibits 

a mix of smooth convex regions and 

numerous layered, terrace-like undulations 

that wrap across the volume. 

symmetry: The shape is strongly asymmetric. 

The two large lobes di ff er in size, thickness, 

and curvature distribution. The right region 

has more pronounced layered striations, while 

the left region is smoother and more globular, 

reinforcing the asymmetric mass distribution. 

topology: The topology is that of a single 

connected solid without holes or branching 

protrusions. It contains multiple shallow 

depressions, internal-looking concave 

surfaces, and a central notch-like indentation 

separating the two primary volumetric lobes. 

global shape: An elongated, curved tubular 

structure with a dominant vertical axis and a 

pronounced C-shaped bend near the upper 

region. The main volume tapers gradually 

from a thicker proximal segment to a narrower 

distal end. Several smaller o ff shoots extend 

laterally from the main tube. 

surface characteristics: Surface appears 

smooth and continuously curved with no 

sharp ridges. The upper curved segment 

shows broad, gentle convexity, while the 

descending portion exhibits a consistent 

cylindrical profile. 

symmetry: The structure is strongly 

asymmetric. The primary curvature and the 

lateral branch orientations both deviate from 

bilateral symmetry. No axial or rotational 

symmetry is apparent due to the varied 

placement and orientation of side branches. 

topology: Topologically a single connected 

tubular form with multiple smaller branches 

extending from the main path. No cavities or 

closed loops are visible. The topology is tree-

like, with one dominant trunk and several 

secondary bifurcations. 

global shape: The structure has an overall 

compact, bulbous mass with several 

elongated protrusions extending outward in 

di ff erent directions. The main body is rounded 

and slightly tapered toward its lower end, 

while three major extensions emerge 

asymmetrically from its mid-to-upper regions. 

surface characteristics: Protrusions blend 

gradually into the main body with soft 

curvature transitions. The extended arms vary 

slightly in thickness and curvature, some 

bending gently while others remain nearly 

straight. The main mass exhibits gentle 

convexity with mild surface undulations but 

no prominent indentations. 

symmetry: The structure is highly 

asymmetric. The protrusions di ff er in length, 

direction, and placement, resulting in no 

bilateral or rotational symmetry. 

topology: It is a single connected solid with 

multiple outward extensions, but no holes, 

cavities, or branching bifurcations that split 

into sub-branches. The global topology is 

compact with several single-branch 

appendage-like forms. 

AVT aorta (CT) Decathlon heart (MRI) 

sketch mask sketch mask sketch mask 

CHAOS liver (CT) Figure A1. Examples of textual geometry descriptions used as the text-based conditioning input in Sketch2CT. For each organ, we show the input sketch, the generated mask, and the corresponding structured text description that captures the global shape, surface characteristics, symmetry, and topology. CHAOS liver (CT) 

> mask  sketch mask  sketch

AVT aorta (CT) 

coarse medium fine coarse medium fine 

Decathlon liver (CT) Decathlon heart (MRI) 

Figure A2. Effect of sketch granularity on segmentation mask generation. For each dataset, we vary the sketch detail in three levels, coarse, medium, and fine, and visualize the corresponding 3D masks produced by Sketch2CT. Increased sketch detail introduces more local structural variations, while the overall anatomical geometry remains consistent across granularity levels. C. Ablation Study 

To evaluate the contribution of the core components in Sketch2CT, we conduct an ablation study aligned with the modules defined in the main framework. Specifically, we examine the impact of removing: (1) TSFE, which refines sparse sketch embeddings via text-guided FiLM modula-tion; (2) CGFM, which performs global semantic align-ment through hierarchical cross- and self-attention; and (3) the segmentation latent diffusion model, which reconstructs coherent 3D masks in latent space under multimodal con-ditioning. For each ablated variant, synthetic images are generated and used to train the same downstream segmenta-tion network [18, 44] as in the main experiments. Table A1 reports Dice scores on real test sets. Removing any sin-gle module leads to a consistent decrease in performance across all datasets, demonstrating that all three components play complementary roles in ensuring accurate multimodal alignment and anatomically faithful 3D mask generation. The full model achieves the best performance across all benchmarks. CHAOS liver AVT aorta Decathlon liver Decathlon heart (CT) (CT) (CT) (MRI) full model 0.893 0.889 0.904 0.711             

> w/o TSFE 0.864 0.859 0.872 0.683 w/o CGFM 0.825 0.818 0.831 0.671 w/o Seg-LDM 0.642 0.629 0.633 0.545

Table A1. Ablation study of Sketch2CT. Removing TSFE, CGFM, or the segmentation latent diffusion model (Seg-LDM) reduces downstream segmentation performance, confirming that all com-ponents are essential for generating anatomically coherent and text-aligned 3D masks. 

We further analyze the individual contributions of sketches and text by evaluating two additional variants: sketch-only and text-only conditioning. As shown in Fig-ure A3, relying solely on sketches leads to incomplete or distorted 3D structures due to the inherent limitations of single-view contours, which lack depth information and volumetric context. Conversely, using text alone removes spatial constraints entirely, resulting in incorrect global shape, misplaced structures, and anatomically implausible geometries. These observations highlight that sketches and text provide complementary forms of guidance. Sketches anchor the spatial structure [21, 33, 64], while text provides semantic and morphological context, both of which are es-sential for accurate and stable 3D mask generation. 

## D. Qualitative Evaluation of Generative Diver-sity 

To qualitatively demonstrate the diversity of the synthesized volumes generated by Sketch2CT, we repeat the generation process three times under the same sketch and text condi-tions. As shown in Figure A4, each run produces anatom-CHAOS liver (CT) AVT aorta (CT) Decathlon liver (CT) Decathlon heart (MRI) 

> GT sketch-only text-only sketch & text

Figure A3. Comparison of segmentation masks generated using sketch-only and text-only conditions. Sketch-only guidance fails to recover full 3D geometry due to single-view ambiguity. In con-trast, text-only guidance yields incorrect global shape and spatial placement, underscoring the need to combine sketches and text. 

ically consistent 3D segmentation masks that follow the shared multimodal conditioning, while the synthesized CT volumes exhibit natural variability in texture, intensity dis-tribution, and fine-scale appearance. This stochasticity re-flects the inherent randomness of the diffusion process, en-abling Sketch2CT to produce diverse yet structurally faith-ful volumetric data. The qualitative results are consis-tent with the quantitative findings reported in the main pa-per, indicating that Sketch2CT maintains stable geometry while supporting realistic appearance-level variation, which is valuable for creating diverse synthetic datasets. S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 

> GT
> mask
> synthesized
> mask
> GT r1 r2 r3

Figure A4. Qualitative diversity demonstration using a single Decathlon liver case. Under identical sketch and text conditions, three independent runs (r1-r3) generate anatomically consistent yet appearance-varying CT volumes, illustrating the stochastic diversity of Sketch2CT.