Title: DiffSoup: Direct Differentiable Rasterization of Triangle Soup for Extreme Radiance Field Simplification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27151v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:33:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# DiffSoup: Direct Differentiable Rasterization of Triangle Soup for Extreme Radiance Field Simplification 

# Kenji Tojo 1 Bernd Bickel 2 Nobuyuki Umetani 11The University of Tokyo 2ETH Z¨ urich 

knjtojo@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp bickelb@ethz.ch n.umetani@gmail.com 

# Abstract 

Radiance field reconstruction aims to recover high-quality 3D representations from multi-view RGB images. Recent advances, such as 3D Gaussian splatting, enable real-time rendering with high visual fidelity on sufficiently power-ful graphics hardware. However, efficient online transmis-sion and rendering across diverse platforms requires drastic model simplification, reducing the number of primitives by several orders of magnitude. We introduce DiffSoup, a radi-ance field representation that employs a soup (i.e., a highly unstructured set) of a small number of triangles with neu-ral textures and binary opacity. We show that this binary opacity representation is directly differentiable via stochas-tic opacity masking, enabling stable training without a mol-lifier (i.e., smooth rasterization). DiffSoup can be raster-ized using standard depth testing, enabling seamless inte-gration into traditional graphics pipelines and interactive rendering on consumer-grade laptops and mobile devices. Code is available at https://github.com/kenji-tojo/diffsoup .

# 1. Introduction 

Realistic and efficient 3D representations are essential for a wide range of vision and graphics applications, includ-ing virtual and augmented reality, digital content creation, and robotic perception. However, it remains challenging to represent complex real-world objects such as foliage, cloth-ing, hair, or architectural details across diverse platforms, including mobile and VR devices. Typically, the number of geometric primitives (e.g., triangles) is tightly limited for interactive rendering and smooth data transfer. Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [36] have demonstrated high-fidelity 3D reconstruction from multi-view RGB im-ages via differentiable volume rendering [22]. More re-cently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [24] models the ra-diance field as point-based primitives, enabling real-time rendering and flexible scene editing given sufficiently pow-120 FPS (a) Multi-view images (b) Simplified radiance field 

# ... 60 FPS 3500 FPS (c) Cross-platform rendering 

Figure 1. (a) Given multi-view RGB images, (b) we reconstruct a simplified radiance field as a textured triangle soup using differen-tiable rasterization. (c) The resulting scene can be rendered within a standard depth-tested rasterization pipeline, enabling seamless visualization across devices—including a high-end desktop with a dedicated GPU, a consumer-grade laptop (MacBook Pro with an M3 Pro chip), and even a smartphone (iPhone 15). 

erful graphics hardware. Although these approaches—and many subsequent variants—achieve remarkable view syn-thesis results, they typically rely on an enormous number of primitives, often orders of magnitude more than the number feasible on restricted platforms and devices. Traditional graphics pipelines are highly optimized for rendering opaque triangles with texture maps. However, opaque triangles introduce difficulties in training: unlike volumetric primitives, they fully occlude surfaces behind them and produce discontinuous color transitions at sil-houettes, both of which impede smooth gradient propaga-tion. Consequently, differentiable rasterization methods for opaque triangles [28, 41] are still not widely adopted in ra-diance field reconstruction pipelines. In this paper, we address the challenging problem of ex-treme model simplification [8] for radiance field–based view synthesis. Our goal is to reconstruct a 3D scene from multi-view RGB images using a small unstructured collection (or 

soup ) of opaque triangles equipped with compact neural textures that have binary opacity. The resulting representa-tion seamlessly integrates into traditional real-time render-

> arXiv:2603.27151v1 [cs.GR] 28 Mar 2026

ing pipelines while preserving the optimization robustness and reconstruction fidelity typically associated with volu-metric approaches. To achieve this, we introduce DiffSoup , a differentiable rasterization method for directly learning an opaque triangle soup. Unlike previous approaches, DiffSoup does not rely on a molifier (i.e., smoothed rasterization) during optimiza-tion, which often suppresses high-frequency appearance de-tails or requires careful scheduling of blur strength [17, 32]. Instead, inspired by recent work on implicit surface recon-struction [62], we differentiate opaque triangle rasterization using stochastic opacity masking , which yields robust gra-dient signals under severe occlusion while producing the ex-act pixel color. To support this, DiffSoup further extends the silhouette-differentiation method of [41] to handle the 

implicit discontinuities introduced by opacity masking. In summary, our contributions are as follows. • We introduce the extreme radiance field simplification 

problem, aiming to represent a 3D scene using an unstruc-tured soup of a small number of textured triangles. • We present DiffSoup , a method for directly differentiating opaque triangle rasterization via stochastic opacity mask-ing , yielding robust gradients even under severe occlusion and frequent visibility discontinuities. • We demonstrate that DiffSoup reconstructs high-fidelity scenes using typically fewer than 20,000 triangles—where existing methods rely on millions of primitives—producing more detail-preserving novel views than baselines, while running interactively on consumer-grade laptops and mobile phones (Figure 1). 

# 2. Related Work 

Differentiable rendering A large body of work recon-structs 3D scenes from images via differentiable render-ing (see survey [23]). These methods optimize geome-try, texture, and material parameters using gradients from rasterization [15, 28, 32, 33, 42], light transport simula-tion [29, 34, 39, 61], implicit surface rendering [1, 30, 35, 47, 48, 57, 62], multi-layer transparency models [10, 15], point splatting [24, 58], and more. Our work focuses on opaque triangle rasterization with a single depth-tested layer, the dominant rendering method in real-time applica-tions such as games, VR/AR, and mobile graphics. 

Differentiable triangle rasterization Computing gradi-ents for opaque, depth-tested rasterization is challenging due to occlusion and the discontinuities that arise at ob-ject silhouettes. Soft-rasterization methods introduce cus-tomized edge smoothing to enforce differentiability [17, 19, 32], while other approaches derive gradients directly from anti-aliasing formulations to preserve sharp silhou-ettes [6, 28, 33, 41]. Although these “blur-free” methods better preserve high-frequency appearance details, their gra-dients are often unstable and non-smooth, leading to sub-optimal reconstruction [38]. To address this, we draw in-spiration from the stochastic surface interpretation devel-oped for implicit surface reconstruction [62] and inverse light transport [61]. Specifically, we extend differentiable rasterizers [28, 41] with stochastic opacity masking , which yields robust gradients for optimizing binary opacity under occlusion while still differentiating the exact pixel colors produced by opaque rasterization. 

Neural radiance fields Radiance-field reconstruction methods such as NeRF and its extensions [2, 3, 11, 36, 37, 50] recover high-quality 3D representations from multi-view RGB images. Despite their strong view-synthesis quality, integrating these representations into traditional real-time rendering pipelines remains difficult due to costly volumetric ray marching [22]. MobileNeRF [7] converts a radiance field into a mesh-based representation but does not directly differentiate the final opaque mesh, relying instead on NeRF optimization as a separate intermediate stage. This limits control over polygon count and final geometry, of-ten producing excessive triangles and losing high-frequency appearance details. In contrast, we extend direct differen-tiable rasterization for polygonal asset creation [15, 28, 41] to radiance-field reconstruction, enabling significantly more compact, detail-preserving results with shorter training. 

3D Gaussian splatting The 3DGS method uses explicit 3D Gaussian primitives for real-time radiance-field render-ing [24]. To capture more accurate geometry and sharper details, follow-up works explore alternative primitives such as 2D Gaussians [20], convex hulls [18], triangles [17], and textured 2D [43, 44, 52, 55, 56] or 3D [5, 56] primi-tives. However, these approaches often rely on excessive primitive counts or introduce custom translucency, both of which limit practicality on consumer-grade devices such as laptops, mobile phones, and VR headsets. Concurrent work [19] proposes a scheduling scheme for the smoothing function in triangle rasterization and shows that scenes can converge to opaque triangles. Their method, however, does not optimize sub-triangle appearance using opacity and tex-ture, and therefore requires many triangles to represent fine details. In contrast, we directly optimize an opaque triangle soup with a neural texture carrying binary opacity, enabling high-frequency details with a drastically smaller number of primitives. StochasticSplats [26] applies a stochastic dif-ferentiation strategy to optimize the translucent appearance of 3DGS using multiple random samples; we instead target the fully opaque appearance of triangle rasterization using a single depth-tested stochastic rasterization. (d) Initial random triangles around SfM keypoints Stochastic opacity masking for non-binary opacity Feature image     

> Output image Texture parameterizing color & alpha maps
> Target image (b) Rasterizing textured mesh with binary opacity (run-time) Loss minimization (a) Color & alpha maps inside a triangle
> (e) Vertex optimization with edge gradient Fast rasterization with depth test query point barycentric coordinates
> Color: Alpha: (c) Pixel-wise MLP Training-specific procedure Figure 2. Overview of our algorithm. (a) We represent radiance fields as a textured triangle soup, where barycentric coordinates map to learnable color and alpha textures. (b) At run time, this representation is rendered with binary opacity, enabling efficient rasterization via standard depth testing. (c) Rasterization produces a high-dimensional color-feature image, which is then mapped to RGB values using a small shared MLP trained to minimize the error between the rendering and the ground-truth image. (d) During training, we initialize triangles around structure-from-motion (SfM) keypoints. (e) We optimize opacity through stochastic opacity masking, while vertex positions are updated using edge gradients for opaque triangles.

# 3. Method 

Given multi-view RGB images, DiffSoup reconstructs a tri-angle soup augmented with neural textures and binary opac-ity. We first outline the necessary background and then de-scribe our differentiable rasterizer, along with the proposed stochastic opacity masking approach. An overview of our algorithm is shown in Figure 2. 

3.1. Preliminary 

Triangle soup representation To represent a radiance field, we use triangles T = {Tt}|T |  

> t=1

together with per-triangle texture functions for color C = {Ct}|T |  

> t=1

and opac-ity A = {αt}|T | 

> t=1

. Each triangle Tt consists of three ver-tices v1, v2, v3 ∈ R3. Given an appropriate parameteri-zation, the color texture Ct maps barycentric coordinates 

b ∈ R2 to the color Ct(b) at the corresponding point on the triangle, while opacity is defined by a scalar function 

αt(b) ∈ [0 , 1] .

Depth-tested rasterization with binary opacity Unlike previous approaches that rely on translucent primitives, DiffSoup employs opaque triangle rasterization with bi-nary opacity, enabling seamless integration into traditional graphics pipelines. Given triangles transformed into camera space, we perform standard rasterization to produce an ar-ray of fragments F = {ff }|F|  

> f

, defined for each individual pixel. Fragments are generated for all triangles intersecting the pixel and encode the pixel-center sample as 

ff = ( bf , D f , t f ), (1) where bf denotes the barycentric coordinates, Df is the fragment depth, and tf is the corresponding triangle index. Given this information, the pixel color ˆC is computed as 

ˆC = Ctf ∗ (bf ∗ ), (2) where f ∗ = arg min f Df is the index of the foremost frag-ment. Hereafter, we write Cf and αf as shorthands for Ctf

and αtf , respectively, to simplify notation. In practical real-time rendering systems such as games, sub-triangle geometric detail is commonly represented us-ing binary opacity stored in a texture. This modifies the selection of the foremost fragment by discarding the frag-ments whose opacity falls below a threshold: 

f ∗ = arg min       

> f∈{ f;α(bf)>0.5}

Df . (3) This enables fine sub-triangle detail using a small number of flat primitives, without adding complexity beyond depth-tested rendering, such as the explicit primitive sorting used in 3DGS [24]. 

Stochastic surface and radiance field loss Although for-ward rendering with opaque rasterization and binary opac-ity is highly efficient, directly optimizing such representa-tions remains difficult because occlusion and visibility tran-sitions are discontinuous. Prior work [7] employs a straight-through estimator [4] to approximate gradients with respect to binarized opacity values during NeRF training. However, this strategy exhibits instability in geometry optimization and requires an additional pre-training stage using a stan-dard NeRF. Recent work has introduced an important advancement for implicit surface reconstruction [35, 61, 62]. In particu-lar, Zhang et al. [62] interpret every point in space as an in-finitesimal opaque surface occurring with probability equal to that point’s opacity. This stochastic surface interpretation leads to a modified NeRF training loss: 

Lsum = X

> i

wi L1(Ci), where wi = ¯ αi αi. (4) Here, Ci and αi denote the color and alpha values at the 

i-th sample point along the ray in depth-sorted order, and 

¯αi = Π i−1

> j=1

(1 − αj ) is the cumulative transmittance. No-tably, they evaluate the pixel-wise L1 loss L1 at the sampled 

points with weights proportional to the volumetric blending weights, rather than computing L1 on the final blended pixel color as in standard NeRFs. They show that this simple, the-oretically grounded loss converges to binary opacity and ex-actly reproduces pixel colors in opaque rendering, without heuristics such as smoothness scheduling or pre-training. However, their method seeks a potential surface via sam-pling in continuous space, which is incompatible with the 

inherently discrete rasterization pipeline, where fragments arise from explicit primitives and depth sorting introduces substantial complexity. Moreover, their formulation omits gradients with respect to the motion of explicit primitives; as a result, when applied within a triangle-based rasteriza-tion pipeline, it yields markedly suboptimal geometry. 

3.2. The DiffSoup differentiable rasterizer 

Our goal is to inversely optimize the previously introduced triangle-soup representation via depth-tested rasterization, given ground-truth multi-view RGB images. To this end, we build on differentiable rasterization methods for opaque triangles [28, 41], which derive gradients by differenti-ating an anti-aliasing model. While these methods pro-vide a solid foundation for differentiating visibility dis-continuities while preserving sharp edges, they struggle to optimize binary opacity and to handle implicit visibility discontinuities—those not associated with explicit triangle edges—introduced by opacity masking. 

Stochastic opacity masking To derive a differentiable optimization method, we extend the stochastic surface ap-proach [62] to our differentiable triangle rasterizer. How-ever, a standard object-order rasterizer does not produce depth-sorted fragments per pixel, so the radiance field loss (4) cannot be directly evaluated. We therefore intro-duce stochastic opacity masking , a principled mechanism that realizes the stochastic surface process entirely within a conventional depth-tested rasterization pipeline. The key idea is to simulate the stochastic surface as a 

discrete stochastic process during fragment generation (Fig-ure 3). Algorithmically, DiffSoup achieves this by introduc-ing stochastic opacity thresholds into (3) as 

f ∗ 

> τ

= arg min       

> ¯f∈{ f∈F| α(bf)> τ f}

D ¯f , (5) (a) Alpha-blending (b) Stochastic opacity masking   

> 01
> Not visible as : Uniform random values
> Color computed by blending Color computed stochastically
> single visible fragment
> Figure 3. (a) Alpha blending computes cumulative transmit-tance over depth-sorted samples and produces the final color as a weighted average. (b) Our stochastic opacity masking, in contrast, simulates a discrete stochastic process over the surface, allowing the renderer to output the exact color of the selected fragment.

where τ = ( τ1, . . . , τ |F| ) are real numbers sampled in-dependently and uniformly for each fragment in the range 

[0 , 1] . This selects a single visible surface point for the pixel, and the resulting color is ˆCτ = Cf ∗ 

> τ

(bf ∗ 

> τ

). Note that the arg min in (5) can be efficiently computed using the z-buffer method without depth sorting the fragments. The crucial observation is that stochastic masking makes the pixel color a random variable : high-opacity fragments are more likely to pass the threshold and become visible, though even the most plausible surface may be skipped with a small probability. Consequently, (5) can be interpreted as drawing a single pixel color from the probability distribu-tion induced by the stochastic surface. Specifically, for a scene parameter θ, we can show that the probability that fragment f is selected as the foremost surface is identical to the weight in (4) as 

p(f ; θ) = wf , (6) whereas our computation does not require sorting fragments by depth. With this identity, the radiance field loss (4) is computed as the expected value of the pixel-wise loss: 

Lexp = Ep(f ;θ)[L1( ˆC)] , (7) as estimated by our stochastic opacity masking. Notably, viewing the rasterization as a discrete stochastic process enables unbiased estimation of the gradient of Lexp 

using the DiffSoup rasterizer as a sampler. Specifically, we apply the likelihood-ratio gradient identity [14, 53]: 

∂θ Ep(f ;θ)[L1( ˆC)] = Ep(f ;θ)[∂θ L1( ˆC)] + Ep(f ;θ)[L1( ˆC) ∂θ log p(f ; θ)] , (8) where ∂θ denotes the partial derivative with respect to the scene parameter θ. The first term is the standard loss gradi-ent for the exact color of the sampled fragment. The second term propagates gradients with respect to opacity, where the score term ∂θ log p(f ; θ) is weighted by the pixel-wise color loss. For a fragment f ′, this score term reduces to the partial derivative with respect to its opacity: 

∂∂α f ′

log p(f ; θ) = 

(

1/α f , f ′ = f, 

−1/(1 − αf ′ ), Df ′ < D f , (9) and no gradient is produced for fragments with Df ′ > D f .Crucially, the opacity gradient for each fragment f ′ depends only on the sampled pixel fragment f and the fragment it-self, yielding an efficient, sort-free gradient estimator that operates entirely within the depth-tested rasterizer (pseu-docode in the supplementary material). 

Handling visibility discontinuities Stochastic opacity masking yields gradients for binary opacity but not for the 

motion of explicit primitives. The approach of [62], which relies on dense spatial sampling for implicit fields, is incom-patible with our primitive-based setting. To obtain motion gradients, we extend the edge-gradient formulation of dif-ferentiable rasterization [41]. Conventional edge gradients detect visibility boundaries by examining changes in trian-gle IDs between neighboring pixels. In DiffSoup, however, stochastic opacity masking introduces intra-triangle visibil-ity discontinuities that do not alter triangle IDs and there-fore remain undetected. To handle these internal discon-tinuities, we evaluate the rasterized edge-gradient expres-sion for all horizontally and vertically adjacent pixel pairs in the stochastic intermediate image when computing the color loss. This naturally generalizes edge gradients to implicit, opacity-induced boundaries. Averaged over training itera-tions, this procedure produces stable and meaningful mo-tion gradients that align with the effective sub-triangle sil-houettes emerging from converged binary opacity, enabling accurate optimization of triangle geometry and placement. 

3.3. Parameterization 

Learnable multi-resolution triangle texture A straight-forward way to represent per-triangle textures Ct and αt

is to map the triangle soup onto a 2D texture atlas and store texture values directly in image space. However, such an at-las may place unrelated triangles adjacent in texture space, which interferes with the use of multi-resolution parameter-izations that have proven highly effective in gradient-based optimization, such as multi-level 3D grids [37, 45] and tex-ture mip-mapping [28, 51]. To avoid these issues and to fully leverage multi-resolution optimization, we adapt these parameterizations to operate directly on our triangle soup. Specifically, we extend the “mesh color” approach [59, 60] for atlas-free texturing to support learnable feature vec-tors. At each resolution level R, we place learnable features ....  

> Barycentric interpolation 8 dim learnable feature (1 dim for alpha + 7 dim for the color feature vector) Texture memory look-up
> (a) Run-time interpolation (b) Training-time interpolation
> ....
> Figure 4. Multi-resolution triangle texture. Top: We parameter-ize the texture using multiple grid resolutions, corresponding to different triangle subdivision levels. Bottom: (a) At run time, the renderer queries only the highest-resolution triangle texture. (b) At training time, this highest-resolution texture is over-parameterized with lower-resolution grids to improve optimization stability.

at the vertices of a recursively subdivided triangle grid: the base level R = 0 corresponds to the original triangle ver-tices, and each subsequent level R refines the previous one, yielding (2 R−1 + 1)(2 R + 1) feature vertices (Figure 4). These multi-resolution per-triangle features are queried via barycentric interpolation within the micro-triangle contain-ing the evaluation point. To enable a multi-resolution representation of the texture at target level Rmax , we maintain learnable feature grids for 

Rmin , . . . , R max −1. All lower-resolution grids are queried and accumulated on the finest grid before rendering, yield-ing an overparameterized high-resolution texture field, sim-ilar in spirit to [51] but applied to a triangular grid rather than a texture image. A sigmoid activation is applied to con-strain the resulting features to [0 , 1] prior to rasterization. This strategy preserves the benefits of multi-resolution op-timization while avoiding multiple per-level texture lookups during rendering. After training, only the finest-resolution texture (after sigmoid activation) is retained and stored as 8-bit PNG images. 

Neural deferred shading To model view-dependent ap-pearance without increasing texture storage or relying on high-order bases (e.g., spherical harmonics), we employ neural deferred shading [46, 54] within our binary-opacity rasterization framework. Rather than storing RGB values directly, each triangle carries an Nfeat -dimensional learn-able feature vector in its color texture, which is rasterized to yield per-pixel feature maps. A lightweight shared MLP is then applied per pixel, taking as input the concatenation of the rasterized feature vector and the viewing direction, and producing the final shaded color. Opacity, on the con-Ground truth 3DGS Triangle splatting TexGS DiffSoup (ours) G ARDEN S TUMP DiffSoup triangles Figure 5. Qualitative results on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. (Left to right) Ground-truth test images; views synthesized by 3DGS [24], Triangle Splatting [17], TexGS [5], our method; and a visualization of our reconstructed triangle geometry. Rows correspond to different scenes, and all models use 15K primitives. 

trary, is stored as a scalar texture and kept outside the neural network. This separation reflects its view-independent na-ture and ensures efficient access during stochastic opacity masking, where opacity must be evaluated for all fragments, while only the “winning” fragment’s color participates in differentiation. We use Nfeat = 7 , allowing all features and opacity to fit in two 8-bit RGBA textures after training. 

3.4. Optimization 

Loss function To optimize our triangle soup representa-tion, we minimize a photometric objective, 

λ L1 + (1 − λ) LSSIM , (10) where LSSIM denotes the structural similarity term [49]. We set λ = 0 .8 following 3DGS [24]. The loss is evaluated on the stochastic rendering, analogous to (7). 

Initialization and training details To better capture high-frequency details through texture, we sample two-thirds of the target points using farthest point sampling (FPS) [9] on the SfM points and draw the remaining one-third uniformly at random. We then randomly initialize triangles around these sampled points with a radius set to one quarter of the average nearest-neighbor distance. We use VectorAdam [31] for optimizing vertex positions and Adam [27] for all other parameters. Training is run for 10,000 iterations. Additional hyperparameters are provided in the supplementary material. We compute gradients for four views in parallel at each optimization step. 

Coarse-to-fine optimization We find that coarse-to-fine texture optimization improves the convergence of both ge-                         

> Table 1. Quantitative evaluation on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. For PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS, we report scene-level averages. The number of primitives is strictly enforced for all methods. Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓# Prims 3DGS [24] 23.72 0.664 0.420 15K TS [17] 22.81 0.634 0.430 15K TexGS [5] 24.80 0.697 0.270 15K
> Ours 24.76 0.748 0.204 15K

ometry and color. Specifically, we use Rmin = Rmax = 3 

(i.e., vertex features) for the first 5000 iterations, and switch to Rmin = 2 and Rmax = 5 for the final 5000 iterations. 

Adaptive control of primitives To balance reconstruc-tion fidelity with a compact primitive budget, we introduce an adaptive mechanism for dynamically adjusting the tri-angle set. To avoid overly large primitives that compro-mise high-frequency detail, we periodically subdivide edges whose view-space length exceeds a prescribed fraction of the image height (1/5 in our experiments). This encour-ages approximately uniform view-space edge lengths and improves the effective use of texture resolution. Conversely, we enforce the target primitive count by pruning triangles with low pixel coverage across the training views until the desired budget is met. In practice, edge splitting and trian-gle removal are performed every 100 iterations. For edge splitting, view-space edge lengths are computed on a ran-domly sampled subset of 20 training views, as evaluating all views would introduce significant overhead. KHADY Ground truth MobileNeRF Full MobileNeRF 15k Ours random Ours retrain S HIP Figure 6. Qualitative results on synthetic scenes. (Left to right) Ground-truth views; view-synthesis results from MobileNeRF; a mesh decimated from the MobileNeRF output using QEM [12]; our results optimized from random initialization; and our results initialized from the MobileNeRF-decimated mesh. Table 2. Comparison with MobileNeRF [7] on synthetic scenes from the NeRF-Synthetic [36] and Shelly [50] datasets. We report PSNR for each scene. The face count for MobileNeRF is averaged across scenes, whereas all other methods use exactly 15K faces. Method NeRF-Synthetic [36] (PSNR ↑) Shelly [50] (PSNR ↑)    

> SHIP CHAIR MIC DRUMS

# Faces ↓ KHADY KITTEN PUG # Faces ↓

MobileNeRF [7] 26.06 31.02 29.18 23.82 159K 26.22 30.05 29.98 275K MobileNeRF + QEM [12] 8.44 16.34 17.35 13.35 15K 11.21 14.42 11.25 15K Ours w/ QEM initialization 26.68 32.11 30.18 23.94 15K 26.55 31.23 30.51 15K Ours w/ random initialization 25.29 31.71 29.64 23.47 15K 26.67 30.68 30.16 15K 

# 4. Experiments 

Real-world dataset We evaluate our method on novel-view synthesis from multi-view RGB inputs using the Mip-NeRF360 dataset [3]. We compare against state-of-the-art primitive-based radiance-field reconstruction approaches. As shown in the qualitative results in Figure 5, 3DGS [24] is not well suited for low primitive budgets (e.g., 15K) and struggles to capture fine details and sharp boundaries. Be-cause the method provides no explicit mechanism for con-trolling the final primitive count, we enforced a fixed budget by sub-sampling the initial SfM points and disabling adap-tive densification. TriangleSplatting [17] (TS) employs triangular primi-tives with a Markov chain Monte Carlo formulation [25] to control the primitive count, but representing complex scenes without texture in this low-poly regime remains fun-damentally challenging. TexturedGaussians [5] (TexGS) in-troduces texture fields to encode high-frequency appearance without increasing the primitive count. While TexGS sig-nificantly enhances detail reconstruction under constrained budgets, it still struggles to reproduce crisp, well-defined boundaries. In contrast, our stochastic opacity masking drives prim-itive opacities toward binary values, enabling the re-construction of the sharpest boundaries and the most detail-preserving view-synthesis results among all methods. These observations are further corroborated by the quanti-tative metrics in Table 1. Rendering efficiency Beyond reducing primitive count, our approach enables hardware-accelerated rasterization by eliminating the transparency handling and depth sort-ing required in prior work. Table 3 reports average rendering cost on an NVIDIA RTX 4090. Although 3DGS benefits from a highly optimized CUDA renderer, our hardware-accelerated triangle rasterization achieves an order-of-magnitude speedup, despite incorporating addi-tional texture information. Moreover, by relying on stan-dard graphics pipelines, the same shader runs on commod-ity devices (e.g., the MacBook in Figure 1), yielding perfor-mance competitive with CUDA-based 3DGS on a desktop GPU. We fix primitive count across all methods, as it pri-marily governs the depth-sorting cost that dominates ren-dering time. For instance, TexGS uses 170 × more tunable parameters than 3DGS yet is only about 10 × slower, indi-cating that adding detail through texture is more efficient than increasing primitive count. 

Synthetic scenes We further evaluate our method on syn-thetic scenes from the NeRF-Synthetic [36] and Shelly [50] datasets. In this setting, we compare our approach with MobileNeRF [7], which converts a trained NeRF [36] into a triangle mesh with a binary opacity texture. Although MobileNeRF can reconstruct fine structures with complex topology, it typically produces an excessively large num-ber of faces per object (often exceeding 150K). Adjusting its training configuration to control the final face count is non-trivial, as training is computationally expensive (over 6 hours in our experiments). Due to MobileNeRF’s grid-aligned mesh topology, standard mesh simplification al-gorithms—such as quadratic error metric (QEM) decima-tion [12]—are ineffective at reducing the face count while preserving detail. Our method naturally supports such geometric simpli-fication scenarios when a coarse geometric prior is avail-able. For instance, as shown in Figure 6, we can uniformly sample triangle primitives within the bounding box of the MobileNeRF representation and iteratively prune transpar-ent primitives to obtain a clean triangle soup. Alternatively, we can use their low-quality decimated mesh as an initial-ization for our optimization. In both cases, our method achieves comparable reconstruction fidelity with a drasti-cally reduced triangle count and significantly less time than retraining MobileNeRF; with QEM initialization, training took an average of 8 minutes and 40 seconds. As shown in Table 2, our simplified radiance-field representations achieve slightly higher PSNR scores across most scenes. 

Additional results Figure 1 shows that scenes opti-mized using our method enable real-time rendering across diverse platforms and devices. We implement feature lookup and opacity masking using standard vertex and frag-                                  

> Table 3. Rendering time in the MipNeRF360 [3] experiment. “Full” denotes the original image resolution. The number of train-able parameters is included for reference. FPS ↑across resolutions Method Full 1/2 1/4 # Params 3DGS [24] 115 482 1.32K 88.5K TS [17] 88.8 370 1.00K 88.5K TexGS [5] 16.8 49.1 94.8 15.1M
> Ours (CUDA) 1.96K 6.11K 13.7K 6.75M
> Ours (laptop) 146 447 879 6.75M Ground truth w/o opacity w/ opacity
> (a) (b)
> Ground truth
> Figure 7. Ablation studies. (a) Without opacity learning, triangles are unable to represent fine sub-triangle boundaries. (b) Without our multi-resolution texture scheme, the instability of color opti-mization leads to noisier geometry (pink arrows). For a clearer comparison, we disable coarse-to-fine optimization in setting (b).

ment shaders, and perform MLP evaluation as a deferred-rendering pass in a separate shader. Figure 7 presents abla-tion studies of our key components. 

# 5. Conclusion 

We introduced a differentiable rasterization method for re-constructing high-fidelity 3D scenes from multi-view RGB images. Our opaque, single-layer shading model limits the representation of transparent objects and thin structures (e.g., hair and fur), which are more naturally handled by volumetric primitives. Because each pixel’s color is deter-mined by a single primitive rather than a blend of many, our method does not yet match state-of-the-art volumet-ric pipelines (e.g., AdaptiveShells [50]). Closing this gap and achieving high-quality anti-aliasing for thin structures while retaining rendering efficiency remain important direc-tions for future work. We believe that our stochastic opac-ity masking not only enables cross-platform rendering and seamless transfer of digital 3D content but also opens new possibilities for differentiable rasterization techniques that require gradients through inherently discrete operations. Acknowledgements 

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feed-back. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 23KJ0699 and by JST ASPIRE Grant Number JP-MJAP2401. 

# References 

[1] Sai Bangaru, Michael Gharbi, Tzu-Mao Li, Fujun Luan, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Milos Hasan, Sai Bi, Zexiang Xu, Gilbert Bernstein, and Fredo Durand. Differentiable rendering of neural sdfs through reparameterization. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Proceedings , New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. [2] Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Pratul P. Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neu-ral radiance fields. ICCV , 2021. [3] Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P. Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. CVPR , 2022. [4] Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas L´ eonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 , 2013. [5] Brian Chao, Hung-Yu Tseng, Lorenzo Porzi, Chen Gao, Tuotuo Li, Qinbo Li, Ayush Saraf, Jia-Bin Huang, Johannes Kopf, Gordon Wetzstein, and Changil Kim. Textured gaus-sians for enhanced 3d scene appearance modeling. In CVPR ,2025. [6] Wenzheng Chen, Jun Gao, Huan Ling, Edward Smith, Jaakko Lehtinen, Alec Jacobson, and Sanja Fidler. Learn-ing to predict 3d objects with an interpolation-based differ-entiable renderer. In Advances In Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2019. [7] Zhiqin Chen, Thomas Funkhouser, Peter Hedman, and An-drea Tagliasacchi. Mobilenerf: Exploiting the polygon ras-terization pipeline for efficient neural field rendering on mo-bile architectures. In The Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. [8] Xavier D´ ecoret, Fr´ edo Durand, Franc ¸ois X. Sillion, and Julie Dorsey. Billboard clouds for extreme model simplification. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Papers , page 689–696, New York, NY, USA, 2003. Association for Computing Machinery. [9] Yuval Eldar, Michael Lindenbaum, Moshe Porat, and Yehoshua Y Zeevi. The farthest point strategy for progres-sive image sampling. IEEE transactions on image process-ing , 6(9):1305–1315, 1997. [10] Stefano Esposito, Anpei Chen, Christian Reiser, Samuel Rota Bul` o, Lorenzo Porzi, Katja Schwarz, Christian Richardt, Michael Zollhoefer, Peter Kontschieder, and An-dreas Geiger. Volumetric surfaces: Representing fuzzy ge-ometries with layered meshes. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. [11] Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance fields without neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5501–5510, 2022. [12] Michael Garland and Paul S. Heckbert. Surface simpli-fication using quadric error metrics. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , page 209–216, USA, 1997. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. [13] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diffi-culty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Pro-ceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artifi-cial intelligence and statistics , pages 249–256. JMLR Work-shop and Conference Proceedings, 2010. [14] Peter W Glynn. Likelihood ratio gradient estimation for stochastic systems. Communications of the ACM , 33(10): 75–84, 1990. [15] Jon Hasselgren, Jacob Munkberg, Jaakko Lehtinen, Miika Aittala, and Samuli Laine. Appearance-driven automatic 3d model simplification. In Eurographics Symposium on Ren-dering , 2021. [16] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016. [17] Jan Held, Renaud Vandeghen, Adrien Deliege, Abdul-lah Hamdi, Anthony Cioppa, Silvio Giancola, Andrea Vedaldi, Bernard Ghanem, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck. Triangle splatting for real-time radi-ance field rendering. arXiv , 2025. [18] Jan Held, Renaud Vandeghen, Abdullah Hamdi, Adrien Deliege, Anthony Cioppa, Silvio Giancola, Andrea Vedaldi, Bernard Ghanem, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck. 3D con-vex splatting: Radiance field rendering with 3D smooth con-vexes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. [19] Jan Held, Renaud Vandeghen, Sanghyun Son, Daniel Re-bain, Matheus Gadelha, Yi Zhou, Ming C. Lin, Marc Van Droogenbroeck, and Andrea Tagliasacchi. Triangle splatting+: Differentiable rendering with opaque triangles. 

arXiv , 2025. [20] Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger, and Shenghua Gao. 2d gaussian splatting for geometrically accu-rate radiance fields. In SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers .Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. [21] Wenzel Jakob. nanobind: tiny and efficient c++/python bind-ings, 2022. https://github.com/wjakob/nanobind. [22] James T Kajiya and Brian P Von Herzen. Ray tracing volume densities. ACM SIGGRAPH computer graphics , 18(3):165– 174, 1984. [23] Hiroharu Kato, Deniz Beker, Mihai Morariu, Takahiro Ando, Toru Matsuoka, Wadim Kehl, and Adrien Gaidon. Differentiable rendering: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12057 , 2020. [24] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨ uhler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 42 (4), 2023. [25] Shakiba Kheradmand, Daniel Rebain, Gopal Sharma, Wei-wei Sun, Yang-Che Tseng, Hossam Isack, Abhishek Kar, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Kwang Moo Yi. 3d gaussian splat-ting as markov chain monte carlo. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. Spotlight Presentation. [26] Shakiba Kheradmand, Delio Vicini, George Kopanas, Dmitry Lagun, Kwang Moo Yi, Mark Matthews, and An-drea Tagliasacchi. Stochasticsplats: Stochastic rasterization for sorting-free 3d gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025. [27] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 ,2014. [28] Samuli Laine, Janne Hellsten, Tero Karras, Yeongho Seol, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Modular primitives for high-performance differentiable rendering. ACM Transac-tions on Graphics , 39(6), 2020. [29] Tzu-Mao Li, Miika Aittala, Fr´ edo Durand, and Jaakko Lehti-nen. Differentiable monte carlo ray tracing through edge sampling. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 37 (6):222:1–222:11, 2018. [30] Zhaoshuo Li, Thomas M¨ uller, Alex Evans, Russell H Tay-lor, Mathias Unberath, Ming-Yu Liu, and Chen-Hsuan Lin. Neuralangelo: High-fidelity neural surface reconstruction. In 

IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion (CVPR) , 2023. [31] Selena Zihan Ling, Nicholas Sharp, and Alec Jacobson. Vec-toradam for rotation equivariant geometry optimization. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:4111– 4122, 2022. [32] Shichen Liu, Tianye Li, Weikai Chen, and Hao Li. Soft ras-terizer: A differentiable renderer for image-based 3d reason-ing. The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2019. [33] Matthew M Loper and Michael J Black. Opendr: An approximate differentiable renderer. In Computer Vision– ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzer-land, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part VII 13 , pages 154–169. Springer, 2014. [34] Guillaume Loubet, Nicolas Holzschuch, and Wenzel Jakob. Reparameterizing discontinuous integrands for differentiable rendering. Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIG-GRAPH Asia) , 38(6), 2019. [35] Ishit Mehta, Manmohan Chandraker, and Ravi Ramamoor-thi. A theory of topological derivatives for inverse render-ing of geometry. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 419– 429, 2023. [36] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-thesis. In ECCV , 2020. [37] Thomas M¨ uller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexan-der Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a multires-olution hash encoding. ACM Trans. Graph. , 41(4):102:1– 102:15, 2022. [38] Baptiste Nicolet, Alec Jacobson, and Wenzel Jakob. Large steps in inverse rendering of geometry. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH Asia) , 40(6), 2021. [39] Merlin Nimier-David, Delio Vicini, Tizian Zeltner, and Wen-zel Jakob. Mitsuba 2: A retargetable forward and inverse renderer. Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIG-GRAPH Asia) , 38(6), 2019. [40] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An im-perative style, high-performance deep learning library. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [41] Stanislav Pidhorskyi, Tomas Simon, Gabriel Schwartz, He Wen, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. Rasterized edge gra-dients: Handling discontinuities differentiably. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 335–352. Springer, 2024. [42] Nikhila Ravi, Jeremy Reizenstein, David Novotny, Tay-lor Gordon, Wan-Yen Lo, Justin Johnson, and Georgia Gkioxari. Accelerating 3d deep learning with pytorch3d. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08501 , 2020. [43] Victor Rong, Jingxiang Chen, Sherwin Bahmani, Kiriakos N Kutulakos, and David B Lindell. Gstex: Per-primitive tex-turing of 2d gaussian splatting for decoupled appearance and geometry modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12954 , 2024. [44] David Svitov, Pietro Morerio, Lourdes Agapito, and Alessio Del Bue. Billboard splatting (bbsplat): Learnable tex-tured primitives for novel view synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.08508 , 2024. [45] Towaki Takikawa, Joey Litalien, Kangxue Yin, Karsten Kreis, Charles Loop, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, Alec Jacobson, Morgan McGuire, and Sanja Fidler. Neural geometric level of detail: Real-time rendering with implicit 3d shapes. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 11358–11367, 2021. [46] Justus Thies, Michael Zollh¨ ofer, and Matthias Nießner. De-ferred neural rendering: Image synthesis using neural tex-tures. Acm Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 38(4):1–12, 2019. [47] Delio Vicini, S´ ebastien Speierer, and Wenzel Jakob. Dif-ferentiable signed distance function rendering. Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH) , 41(4):125:1– 125:18, 2022. [48] Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus: Learning neural implicit surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10689 , 2021. [49] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Si-moncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing ,13(4):600–612, 2004. [50] Zian Wang, Tianchang Shen, Merlin Nimier-David, Nicholas Sharp, Jun Gao, Alexander Keller, Sanja Fidler, Thomas M¨ uller, and Zan Gojcic. Adaptive shells for efficient neural radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. , 42(6), 2023. [51] Philippe Weier, J´ er´ emy Riviere, Ruslan Guseinov, Stephan Garbin, Philipp Slusallek, Bernd Bickel, Thabo Beeler, and Delio Vicini. Practical inverse rendering of textured and translucent appearance. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH) , 44(4), 2025. [52] Sebastian Weiss and Derek Bradley. Gaussian billboards: Expressive 2d gaussian splatting with textures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12734 , 2024. [53] Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following al-gorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning , 8(3):229–256, 1992. [54] Markus Worchel, Rodrigo Diaz, Weiwen Hu, Oliver Schreer, Ingo Feldmann, and Peter Eisert. Multi-view mesh recon-struction with neural deferred shading. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 6187–6197, 2022. [55] Rui Xu, Wenyue Chen, Jiepeng Wang, Yuan Liu, Peng Wang, Lin Gao, Shiqing Xin, Taku Komura, Xin Li, and Wenping Wang. Supergaussians: Enhancing gaussian splat-ting using primitives with spatially varying colors, 2024. [56] Tian-Xing Xu, Wenbo Hu, Yu-Kun Lai, Ying Shan, and Song-Hai Zhang. Texture-gs: Disentangling the geometry and texture for 3d gaussian splatting editing, 2024. [57] Lior Yariv, Jiatao Gu, Yoni Kasten, and Yaron Lipman. Vol-ume rendering of neural implicit surfaces. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 34:4805–4815, 2021. [58] Wang Yifan, Felice Serena, Shihao Wu, Cengiz ¨ Oztireli, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Differentiable surface splatting for point-based geometry processing. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG) , 38(6):1–14, 2019. [59] Cem Yuksel. Mesh color textures. In Proceedings of High Performance Graphics , New York, NY, USA, 2017. Associ-ation for Computing Machinery. [60] Cem Yuksel, John Keyser, and Donald H House. Mesh col-ors. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 29(2):1–11, 2010. [61] Ziyi Zhang, Nicolas Roussel, and Wenzel Jakob. Many-worlds inverse rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. , 2025. [62] Ziyi Zhang, Nicolas Roussel, Thomas Muller, Tizian Zeltner, Merlin Nimier-David, Fabrice Rousselle, and Wenzel Jakob. Radiance surfaces: Optimizing surface representations with a 5d radiance field loss. In Proceedings of the Special Inter-est Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. Supplementary Material for DiffSoup 

This supplementary material provides an accompanying video and a detailed document to complement the main pa-per. The video presents the optimization sequence, novel-view synthesis results with geometry visualizations, and a real-time demonstration in which we interactively render a scene containing all models from the NeRF-Synthetic [36] and Shelly [50] datasets on a mobile device (iPhone 15). This mobile demonstration achieves an average of 51 FPS at 2K × 1K resolution on camera views computed using Fibonacci spiral sampling over the upper hemisphere (in-cluded in our code release). In addition, the following sections provide further details on our experimental setup, method, mathematical derivations, and additional figures and tables. 

# A. Experimental Setup 

A.1. Implementation 

We implement our method in Python using PyTorch [40] for automatic differentiation. Our differentiable rasterizer is implemented in CUDA and exposed as a custom Py-Torch operator via nanobind [21]. Edge splitting rou-tines are likewise implemented in C++ and invoked directly from Python. Our implementation is publicly available at 

https://github.com/kenji-tojo/diffsoup .

A.2. Hardware 

Our experiments were conducted primarily on a worksta-tion equipped with an Intel Core i9-14900K CPU, 64 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB of VRAM. In particular, all results produced by our method were obtained in a single-GPU setting on the RTX 4090. To parallelize the evaluation of baseline methods, we additionally used a separate machine equipped with an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU with 48 GB of VRAM. This secondary hardware was used solely to accelerate baseline training; all reported results are from single-GPU runs, and all methods fit within the memory budget of the RTX 4090. The original MobileNeRF results [7] were obtained us-ing eight NVIDIA V100 GPUs. Reproducing this multi-GPU configuration using a single GPU would not be fea-sible with our hardware and would also be disproportion-ate relative to the other baselines. For context, all other baselines—and our method—typically complete training in roughly 30 minutes on a single GPU. In contrast, MobileN-eRF’s training is considerably more computationally de-manding: keeping all hyperparameters fixed and running on a single GPU results in training times of around 6 hours. Replicating their original eight-GPU setup would multiply the computational cost and exceed our available resources. To enable a fair comparison, we therefore run the MobileN-eRF code on the same single GPU used for all other meth-

Algorithm A1: Stochastic opacity masking 

Input: fragments F = {f1, . . . , f|F| }

Output: pixel color ˆC and color/opacity gradients 

1. Forward pass 

compute f ∗ and ˆC by sampling thresholds τ , and store (ff ∗ , ˆC) in image-sized buffers 

2. Backward pass (a) Color gradient: differentiate L1( ˆC)

(b) Opacity gradient: foreach f ′ ∈ { 1, . . . , |F|} do if f ′ = f ∗ then s ← 1/α f ∗

else if Df ′ < D f ∗ then s ← − 1/(1 − αf ′ )

else s ← 0

add L1( ˆC) s to the opacity gradient of f ′

ods. This results in an effective batch size one eighth of the original, while the number of iterations and the learning rate remain identical to those reported in the paper. 

# B. Method Details 

This section provides additional details about our method. 

B.1. Stochastic Opacity Masking Pseudocode 

Algorithm A1 summarizes the forward and backward passes of our stochastic opacity masking procedure, as de-scribed in the main paper. 

B.2. Hyperparameters 

For Adam [27] and VectorAdam [31], we set β1 = 0 .9,

β2 = 0 .999 , and ϵ = 1 .0 × 10 −8. We exponentially anneal the learning rate so that it is reduced by a factor of 100 over the course of training. We use an initial learning rate of 

5.0 × 10 −2 for color and alpha features, and 1.0 × 10 −2

for neural network weights. For vertex positions, we set the initial learning rate to 1.0 × 10 −2 for real scenes and 

1.0 × 10 −3 for synthetic scenes, as geometry in synthetic datasets tends to be more compact. 

B.3. MLP Architecture 

For deferred shading, we apply a shared-weight multilayer perceptron (MLP) with two 16-dimensional hidden layers to the per-pixel feature vector. As input to the MLP, we concatenate the 7-dimensional color feature vector with the per-pixel view direction encoded using spherical harmonic bases up to degree 2, resulting in a 7 + 9 = 16 -dimensional input vector. All MLP weights are initialized following Xavier initialization [13]. All texture feature vectors are initialized to zero, which results in an initial value of 0.5 after applying the sigmoid. Random initialization Final triangle soup Target image ... 

Training progression Figure A1. (Left) Starting from a randomly initialized triangle soup, training gradually drives irrelevant triangles to become transparent, and these are regularly removed by our adaptive resampling step. This process yields a clean geometry that captures even thin structures and challenging topology. (Right) The corresponding ground-truth image is shown for reference. 

We observe that color vibrancy can be diminished af-ter passing through the MLP. To mitigate this, we interpret the first four channels of the color feature as RGBA and compute the final RGB output as a blend of this RGBA feature and the MLP prediction, yielding a parameter-free, lightweight skip-connection layer [16]. 

B.4. Coarse-to-Fine Optimization 

As described in the main paper, we transition from the coarse feature grid to the fine grid at iteration 5000. This is performed by sampling the coarse color feature at each grid coordinate and copying it to the new Rmin level. Be-cause coarse-stage training often produces oversaturated al-pha values that hinder later shape refinement, we reinitialize the alpha feature during this transition. 

B.5. Random Triangle Soup Initialization 

For the synthetic data experiments, we additionally re-port results obtained using a random initialization of the triangle-soup geometry. We generate this initialization by uniformly sampling seed points inside the bounding box used for MobileNeRF [7] and placing a triangle around each point with a random orientation and a radius of 0.01 (the bounding-box scale typically ranges from 2 to 4). For a randomly initialized triangle soup, we apply a cus-tom adaptive triangle-resampling procedure to avoid unnec-essary triangles. Specifically, we first remove triangles that are fully transparent—that is, those that receive no pixel coverage in any training image. We then iteratively split the longest edges until the triangle count reaches the target value, ensuring a consistent number of triangles through-out training. Figure A1 shows the optimization progression from random initialization. 

B.6. Data Size 

Our representation uses 9 floating-point numbers (3 per ver-tex) to encode the geometry of each triangle. This matches the data footprint of standard 3DGS variants [24], which also require 9 floating-point values (3 for the center, 3 for the rotation, and 3 for the scale) per primitive. We use a triangle texture resolution of Rmax = 5 at in-ference time, which produces (2 4 + 1) × (2 5 + 1) = 561 

grid points per triangle. At this resolution, all triangle tex-tures can be packed into a 4K grid provided the number of triangles remains below 

4096 2/561 ≈ 29 ,905 . (A1) Note that 4K textures are widely supported across rendering environments, including mobile devices. In the comparison on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset, Tex-tured Gaussians (TexGS) [5] employ a 50 × 50 texture grid (2500 texels) per primitive. Because their representation combines RGBA textures with per-primitive spherical har-monic (SH) coefficients, the effective number of texture channels per primitive is 2500 × 4 = 10 ,000 , whereas our method uses only 561 × 8 = 4 ,488 channels per triangle (recall that we use a 7-channel color feature plus alpha). 

# C. Mathematical Derivations 

In this section, we present the full mathematical derivations corresponding to the equations introduced in the method section of the main paper. 

C.1. Equivalence of stochastic opacity masking and radiance field loss 

In the main paper, we claim that our stochastic opacity masking technique selects a fragment f with probability 

p(f ) = 

 Y      

> f′∈{ f′;Df′<D f}

(1 − αf ′ )

 αf , (A2) which coincides with the sample weight wf used as the blending weight in the radiance field loss [62] and in the standard volume rendering formulation of NeRFs [36]. This equivalence follows directly from the observation that frag-ment f is selected as the foremost visible fragment if and only if all fragments in front of it are not visible and frag-ment f itself is visible. Fragments behind f do not influ-Ground truth 3DGS Triangle splatting TexGS DiffSoup (ours) KITCHEN DiffSoup triangles 

> S TUMP ROOM

Figure A2. Additional qualitative results on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. (Left to right) Ground-truth test images; views synthesized by 3DGS [24], Triangle Splatting [17], TexGS [5], our method; and a visualization of our reconstructed triangle geometry. Rows correspond to different scenes, and all models use 15K primitives. 

ence its visibility and are therefore marginalized out of the probability computation, yielding the expression in (A2). 

C.2. Application of the likelihood-ratio identity 

The main paper derives the unbiased estimator using the likelihood-ratio identity [14, 53]. Although this identity is classical and not part of our technical contribution, we briefly verify that it applies to our gradient expression as well, to keep the presentation self-contained. We first express the expected value in summation form: 

Ep(f )[L( ˆC)] = X 

> f∈F

L( ˆC) p(f ). (A3) By differentiating the expression with respect to αf ′ , we obtain 

∂∂α f ′

Ep(f )[L( ˆC)] = X 

> f∈F

∂L( ˆC)

∂α f ′

p(f )+ X 

> f∈F

L( ˆC) ∂p (f )

∂α f ′

,

(A4) where the first term is simply the expected value 

X 

> f∈F

∂L( ˆC)

∂α f ′

p(f ) = Ep(f )

"

∂L( ˆC)

∂α f ′

#

, (A5) by the definition of expectation. The second term can also be written as an expectation by observing that 

X 

> f∈F

L( ˆC) ∂p (f )

∂α f ′

= X 

> f∈F

L( ˆC)

 1

p(f )

∂p (f )

∂α f ′



p(f )= X 

> f∈F

L( ˆC) ∂log p(f )

∂α f ′

p(f )= Ep(f )



L( ˆC) ∂log p(f )

∂α f ′



.

(A6) Combining the two parts yields the gradient estimator intro-duced in the main paper. 

C.3. Gradient of the score term 

Based on the probability p(f ), the main paper derives the score term as 

∂ log p(f )

∂α f ′

=

(

1/α f , f ′ = f, 

−1/(1 − αf ′ ), Df ′ < D f , (A7) which is used for computing the loss gradient. This expres-sion follows directly from applying the chain rule, 

∂ log p(f )

∂α f ′

= 1

p(f )

∂p (f )

∂α f ′

, (A8) where we observe that 

∂p (f )

∂α f ′

=

(

p(f )/α f , f ′ = f, 

−p(f )/(1 − αf ′ ), Df ′ < D f , (A9) which is obtained by differentiating the product expression of p(f ) with respect to αf ′ .

# D. Additional Figures 

Figure A2 shows additional qualitative comparison results on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. Overall, our opaque textured-triangle representation produces the sharpest visu-als under a tight primitive budget, and in particular yields noticeably sharper results than TexGS [5], which uses tex-tured translucent primitives. Figure A3 visualizes the tex-ture memory used in our method. Decode 

(a) Feature (b) RGB + opacity 

Figure A3. We represent RGB color and opacity within each tri-angle by linearly interpolating values stored at subdivision points. (a) Each subdivision point stores eight 32-bit floating-point val-ues: a 7-dimensional color feature vector and one opacity value. (b) The color feature vector is decoded into RGB using a small neural network, while the final channel is used directly as opacity. # of iterations MAE Ground truth (a) (b) (c) 

Figure A4. (Top row, left to right) Ground-truth images for the BICYCLE scene from the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. This scene ex-hibits an extremely large spatial extent, as indicated by the distant objects highlighted with orange arrows. (a) Triangle-soup render-ing and reconstructed geometry using our method with |T | = 15K 

triangles and a texture resolution of Rmax = 5 . (b) Rendering and geometry using |T | = 60K triangles and Rmax = 4 . (c) Ren-dering and geometry using |T | = 100K triangles and Rmax = 4 .(Bottom row) Test error measured as mean absolute error (MAE) over training iterations for the three configurations, demonstrating convergence behavior and clarifying the representational capacity. 

Challenging case Outdoor scenes are generally more challenging to represent with a small number of triangles than indoor or synthetic scenes, primarily due to their ex-tremely large spatial extent. A particularly notable ex-ample in our experiments is the B ICYCLE scene from the 

MipNeRF360 [3] dataset (Figure A4). In this scene, im-portant visual details—such as the spokes of the bicycle wheel—occupy only a tiny region within a very large over-all scene volume. Our adaptive resampling method encourages roughly uniform pixel coverage per triangle to make the most effec-tive use of the available texture resolution. In such extreme cases, however, geometric structures that fall below a cer-tain relative world-space scale can be missed. This effect can be seen in Figure A4 (a), where large objects are recon-structed clearly under a tight triangle budget, but the thin wheel spokes are lost. A potential remedy is to decrease the average screen-space footprint of each triangle by increasing the number of triangles. Figure A4 (b) illustrates this approach: we halve the screen-space edge-split threshold, increase the target triangle count to four times that of (a), and reduce the texture resolution by one subdivision level. This ad-justment yields noticeably better reconstruction of fine ge-Table A1. Additional quantitative comparisons with MobileNeRF [7] on synthetic scenes from the NeRF-Synthetic [36] and Shelly [50] datasets. In addition to the PSNR values reported in the main paper, we report SSIM (top table) and LPIPS (bottom table) scores for each scene. The face count for MobileNeRF is averaged across scenes, whereas all other methods use the exact face count specified. See the main paper for further discussion. Method NeRF-Synthetic [36] (SSIM ↑) Shelly [50] (SSIM ↑)    

> SHIP CHAIR MIC DRUMS

# Faces ↓ KHADY KITTEN PUG # Faces ↓

MobileNeRF [7] 0.817 0.958 0.961 0.910 159K 0.810 0.931 0.857 275K MobileNeRF + QEM [12] 0.554 0.793 0.857 0.739 15K 0.686 0.847 0.729 15K Ours w/ QEM init. 0.848 0.975 0.975 0.931 15K 0.838 0.951 0.903 15K Ours w/ random init. 0.828 0.972 0.972 0.927 15K 0.838 0.950 0.899 15K Method NeRF-Synthetic [36] (LPIPS ↓) Shelly [50] (LPIPS ↓)    

> SHIP CHAIR MIC DRUMS

# Faces ↓ KHADY KITTEN PUG # Faces ↓

MobileNeRF [7] 0.173 0.042 0.073 0.094 159K 0.205 0.099 0.192 275K MobileNeRF + QEM [12] 0.453 0.227 0.235 0.314 15K 0.306 0.170 0.294 15K Ours w/ QEM init. 0.119 0.024 0.037 0.066 15K 0.153 0.074 0.116 15K Ours w/ random init. 0.147 0.027 0.043 0.071 15K 0.154 0.077 0.120 15K Table A2. Quantitative results for the ablation study on the Mip-NeRF360 [3] dataset. From top to bottom: (1) our method with opacity fixed to 1, (2) a variant that uses only the highest-resolution feature grid with Rmax = 5 (i.e., without multi-resolution features and without the coarse-to-fine strategy), (3) a variant that uses multi-resolution features but does not use the coarse-to-fine strategy, and (4) our full method combining both multi-resolution features and the coarse-to-fine strategy. PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS scores are reported as scene-level averages. The number of triangles is fixed at |T | = 15K for all methods. Method PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

w/o opacity 24.65 0.744 0.205 

Rmin = Rmax = 5 23.54 0.719 0.226 

Rmin = 2 , R max = 5 24.48 0.747 0.203 Ours full 24.76 0.748 0.204 

ometry while keeping the overall texture memory roughly unchanged. If the budget allows, further fidelity can be achieved by reducing the edge-split threshold to one third of (a) and increasing the triangle budget to 100K, as shown in Figure A4 (c). While uniformly increasing the number of triangles im-proves representational capacity, as seen in the convergence plot of Figure A4, it is still highly desirable to remain within the original tight triangle budget. We believe this is achiev-able through more sophisticated strategies for allocating tri-angle density and texture resolution—beyond our current uniform, image-space-driven resampling—which could fur-ther improve the reconstruction of challenging outdoor scenes under very limited primitive budgets (e.g., the 15K budget used in our experiments). Designing such spatially adaptive edge-splitting and texture-resolution schemes re-mains an important direction for future work. 

# E. Additional Quantitative Results 

This section presents additional quantitative results for ex-periments presented in the main paper. Table A1 re-ports SSIM and LPIPS scores for the comparison against MobileNeRF [7] on synthetic datasets, supplementing the PSNR results presented in the main paper. In terms of these metrics, the two variants of our method consistently achieve the best and second-best performance. Table A2 reports additional quantitative scores for the ablation study conducted in the main paper. The inabil-ity to represent sub-triangle geometry when binary opac-ity is not used is especially evident in the degraded SSIM and LPIPS scores. Interestingly, the variant that uses the multi-resolution feature grid throughout optimization (i.e., without the coarse-to-fine strategy) provides a competi-tive alternative, whereas the variant that relies solely on the highest-resolution grid consistently performs the worst. This highlights the effectiveness of our multi-resolution feature-grid design. Our full method additionally incorpo-rates the coarse-to-fine strategy and consistently achieves the best or second-best results across all metrics. We ob-serve that coarse-to-fine training often improves triangle coverage and geometric fitting, as reflected in higher PSNR scores compared to the multi-resolution-only variant. 

# F. Additional Comparisons and Ablations 

This section presents additional experiments and analyses that complement the main paper, including a comparison Ground truth Figure A5. Effect of varying the triangle budget on reconstruction quality for NeRF-Synthetic [36] scenes. Each row shows (left to right) a ground-truth view followed by our results with |T | = 15K , 5K , and 1K triangles, respectively. 

with 3DGS-MCMC [25], storage costs, training time, and a primitive-budget sweep. 

F.1. Comparison with 3DGS-MCMC 

3DGS-MCMC [25] provides explicit control over the prim-itive count while relying on the same primitives as 3DGS, making it a relevant additional baseline. We evaluate it un-der the same 15K budget on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. Table A3 reports quality metrics, and Table A4 reports ren-dering speed. Although 3DGS-MCMC outperforms vanilla 3DGS in reconstruction quality, it remains slower than our method and lower in quality than the textured approaches (TexGS and ours) in this low-budget regime. 

F.2. Storage Cost 

Table A5 reports the inference-time GPU memory footprint and storage cost of the models used in our experiments. Among the textured methods (i.e., TexGS, MobileNeRF, and ours), our approach achieves the lowest memory and storage cost. Both MobileNeRF and our method leverage 8-bit RGBA textures, which reduce memory usage and enable efficient storage and data transmission via PNG compres-sion. We were unable to load the scene shown in our supple-mentary video, comprising 14 models, on a mobile device using MobileNeRF; after loading 6 models, the total mem-ory footprint reached 1.58 GB, exceeding the browser mem-ory limit. In contrast, our full scene requires only 916 MB. Table A3. Reconstruction quality comparison with 3DGS-MCMC [25] on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. All methods use 15K primitives. Method PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓                                                                              

> 3DGS [24] 23.72 0.664 0.420 3DGS-MCMC [25] 24.22 0.692 0.389 TexGS [5] 24.80 0.697 0.270
> Ours 24.76 0.748 0.204
> Table A4. Rendering speed comparison with 3DGS-MCMC [25] on the MipNeRF360 [3] dataset. All methods use 15K primitives. FPS ↑across resolutions Method Full 1/2 1/4 3DGS [24] 115 482 1.32K 3DGS-MCMC [25] 214 598 943 TexGS [5] 16.8 49.1 94.8
> Ours (CUDA) 1.96K 6.11K 13.7K
> Table A5. Average GPU memory footprint and storage cost of the models used in our experiments. The average primitive count is also reported. Method Memory ↓Storage ↓# Prims 3DGS [24] 3.38MB 3.38MB 15K TexGS [5] 576MB 576MB 15K MobileNeRF [7] 329MB 118MB 209K
> Ours 65.9MB 44.3MB 15K Table A6. Reconstruction quality (PSNR) across triangle budgets on NeRF-Synthetic [36] scenes. Quality degrades gracefully from
> |T | =15K to 5K , with a more noticeable drop at 1K .PSNR ↑
> # Triangles SHIP MIC LEGO HOTDOG FICUS
> |T | = 15K 26.68 30.18 29.78 33.53 27.51
> |T | = 5K 26.12 30.03 28.21 33.45 27.39
> |T | = 1K 24.34 28.26 24.36 31.40 24.27

F.3. Training Time 

For the G ARDEN scene at the 1/4 resolution reported in Table 1 of the main paper, 3DGS completes training in 4.5 minutes. Our method requires a longer training time of 13.5 minutes, reflecting the use of our prototype software raster-izer during training. Despite this, our training is still sig-nificantly faster than TexGS, which also relies on textures and requires 46 minutes. Importantly, our stochastic opac-ity masking introduces only a small overhead: ablating it reduces the training time to 11.5 minutes. 

F.4. Triangle Budget Analysis 

Increasing the number of primitives improves reconstruc-tion fidelity, especially for outdoor scenes with large spatial extent (see Figure A4). For per-object scenes in the NeRF-Synthetic [36] dataset, the triangle count can be further re-duced with only minor quality degradation. We evaluate this on a subset of scenes using the same QEM initialization as in our MobileNeRF comparison; Table A6 and Figure A5 report quantitative and qualitative results, respectively. For example, on S HIP , lowering the budget from |T | = 15K 

to 5K decreases PSNR by only 0.56 dB, with the main visi-ble artifact being a slight loss of thin structures. For scenes with an overall compact shape, such as H OTDOG , the drop is even smaller and barely perceptible. In contrast, reducing to 1K triangles leads to noticeable degradation across all scenes, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Automatically selecting the optimal budget given a user-specified error tol-erance is an interesting direction for future work.