Title: GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20715v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 01:18:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# GeoRelight: Learning Joint Geometrical Relighting and Reconstruction with Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers 

## Yuxuan Xue 1,2 Ruofan Liang 1 Egor Zakharov 1 Timur Bagautdinov 1 Chen Cao 1

## Giljoo Nam 1 Shunsuke Saito 1 Gerard Pons-Moll 2,3 Javier Romero 11 Codec Avatars Lab, Meta 2 University of Tübingen  

> 3

## Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus Ho der for Teaser        

> Input Albedo Normal Reconstruction Relighting with Different Environment Illumination
> 01 03 04 05 08 09

Figure 1. GeoRelight. Given a monocular image (left), our framework jointly generates a relit image under novel illumination (right), disentangles image intrinsics like albedo (2nd column) and normals (3rd column), and extracts a fine-grained 3D pointcloud (4th column). 

## Abstract 

Relighting a person from a single photo is an attrac-tive but ill-posed task, as a 2D image ambiguously entan-gles 3D geometry, intrinsic appearance, and illumination. Current methods either use sequential pipelines that suffer from error accumulation, or they do not explicitly leverage 3D geometry during relighting, which limits physical con-sistency. Since relighting and estimation of 3D geometry are mutually beneficial tasks, we propose a unified Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer (DiT) that jointly solves for both: GeoRelight . We make this possible through two key technical contributions: isotropic NDC-Orthographic Depth (iNOD), a distortion-free 3D representation compat-ible with latent diffusion models; and a strategic mixed-data training method that combines synthetic and auto-labeled 

1

> arXiv:2604.20715v1 [cs.CV] 22 Apr 2026

real data. By solving geometry and relighting jointly, Geo-Relight achieves state-of-the-art results in photorealistic relighting, as well as high-fidelity 3D reconstruction and intrinsic estimation from a single image. Project page: 

https://yuxuan-xue.com/georelight 

## 1. Introduction 

Altering illumination on a person from a single image is a core problem for computer graphics and vision [6, 17, 26, 28]. It enables enormous applications, from creative editing and computational photography to virtual reality and film production. However, the task is profoundly ill-posed. A single 2D image is an ambiguous projection of three distinct and entangled factors: the 3D geometry of the subject, their intrinsic appearance like base color, and illumination of the scene. To realistically change the light, a model must, ex-plicitly or implicitly, disentangle these components [22, 46]. Recent learning-based approaches often fall into two cat-egories, each with a specific drawback. First, end-to-end "translator" models [4, 6, 9, 26] learn a direct pixel-to-pixel mapping. This approach is often limited in physical plausi-bility due to the absence of geometric modeling, failing to produce realistic shadows or highlights that are consistent with the subject’s 3D shape. Second, and more common, are sequential pipelines [17, 22, 28, 46]. These methods first predict a set of intermediate buffers like albedo and sur-face normals which are passed to a separate neural render-ing module to synthesize the final image. The critical flaw in this sequential design is error accumulation [9]: any in-accuracies in the initial geometry estimation are baked into the buffers and cannot be corrected by the renderer. In this paper, we argue that relighting and geometry re-construction are not separate sequential tasks, but are mu-tually beneficial and must be solved jointly . This synergy is two-fold. First, accurate 3D geometry is essential for the re-lighting model to render physically-plausible local shading and, crucially, to form correct cast shadows. Conversely, the appearance of shading in the image provides power-ful shape-from-shading cues that can refine the underly-ing geometry estimation. We introduce GeoRelight , a uni-fied generative framework that first embodies this joint ap-proach. At its core is a Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [29] that simultaneously denoises both the relit image and the 3D geometry, allowing information to flow between both tasks throughout the generation process This joint generative approach, however, introduces two significant technical challenges. First, 3D geometry must be made compatible with a latent diffusion model that uses a pretrained 2D VAE to enable high-resolution generation. Standard representations like point maps become extremely noisy after lossy compression into VAE latent space, while traditional depth maps require normalization that anisotrop-ically distorts the 3D shape. To solve this, we propose isotropic NDC-Orthographic Depth (iNOD) (Sec. 3.3), a novel representation that isotropically scales the 3D shape before projection, preserving the geometry in a “VAE-friendly” image format without distortion. Second, this model requires data that is both photorealistic and has ac-curate 3D geometry labels, which is difficult to acquire. We observe that synthetic trained model is robust to produce good intrinsics and geometry. Hence use our own model to annotate pseudo labels for photorealistic images from light stage and in-the-wild data. Then, we use the strategic mixed-data training procedure (Sec. 3.4) where we leverage our model’s flexibility to train on a mix of synthetic data (for perfect labels) and real-world data (for photorealism). Our unified multi-modal DiT model achieves state-of-the-art results in both photorealistic relighting and high-fidelity 3D reconstruction from a single in-the-wild image. In summary, our contributions are: • A unified Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformer framework that jointly generates relit images, intrinsic color, surface normal details, and 3D geometry. • iNOD, a novel and VAE-friendly depth representation that isotropically preserves 3D geometry in latent space. • A strategic mixed-data training methodology that com-bines synthetic data with auto-labeled real-world images to achieve both geometric accuracy and photorealism. 

## 2. Related Works 

Image relighting and its related problems (e.g. intrinsic decomposition) have a long tradition in computer vision, going back to the work on intrinsic images by Barrow [3] and the Retinex algorithm by Land [20]. We encourage the reader to read recent surveys [8, 48] for a wide viewpoint on intrinsic decomposition and human relighting, while we focus on the latest work on relighting in the remainder. 

2.1. Neural Rendering and Relighting 

Recent generative models have approached monocular im-age relighting in several ways. NeuralGaffer [12] treats relighting as an end-to-end 2D diffusion process, finetun-ing a model on a large synthetic dataset to relight any ob-ject without explicit intrinsic decomposition. IC-Light [47] focuses on illumination harmonization, using diffusion to relight a foreground object to match a new background. LightLab [24] enables direct manipulation of existing light sources in an image through diffusion models. To overcome limitations from above methods, two-stage pipelines like Total Relighting [28] first estimates intrin-sics (e.g., albedo, normals) and then render the image with a neural shading module. This concept has been adapted in RGB-X [46] and DiffusionRenderer [22], by using sep-arate diffusion models for forward and inverse rendering. Other methods like DiLightNet [45] use coarse geometry 2High Resolution,     

> Point map
> Dilated iNOD
> VAE point map
> process_SUBJECT_C006_POSE_02_Cam10/
> VAE Dilated iNOD
> VAE Dilated iNOD w/ masked crop
> Anisotropically normalized depth
> Metric depth w/ known camera intrinsics
> iNOD
> ✅noise-free
> ✅intrinsics-free
> ✅Geometry
> ✅Latent friendly

Figure 2. iNOD: A Distortion-Free and VAE-Friendly Geome-try Representation. Standard Point Maps (top-left) become noisy when VAE-encoded, and anisotropically Normalized Depth (top-right) severely distorts the 3D shape. 

estimates to create "radiance hints" that guide a ControlNet-based diffusion model. Careaga and Aksoy [5] leverage physical intrinsic decomposition for controllable relighting of photographs. For video, Lux Post Facto [26] also uses a two-stage pipeline, addressing temporal consistency by finetuning a video diffusion model on a hybrid of static OLAT (One-Light-At-a-Time) data and in-the-wild videos. A primary drawback of sequential pipelines is their sus-ceptibility to error accumulation, where inaccuracies from the intrinsic estimation stage are amplified by the renderer. The advantage of estimating geometry and intrinsics was al-ready raised by the seminal work by Barron et al. [2] in the context of intrinsic image decomposition, without consider-ing relighting yet. More recently, UniRelight [9] introduced a general-purpose framework that jointly estimates albedo and synthesizes relit video in a single pass. By formulat-ing this as a joint denoising problem in a video diffusion model [7, 23], it implicitly reasons about scene structure. While powerful, its joint estimation is limited to albedo, leaving a critical gap in explicitly and jointly modeling the 3D geometry essential for consistent shading. 

2.2. Geometry with Latent Diffusion 

A challenge in our joint framework is finding a 3D geometry representation compatible with high-resolution latent diffu-sion models that rely on pretrained VAEs to encode inputs into a latent space. Existing representations like 3D point maps (used in [33–36]) become noisy after being processed by the VAE (see Fig. 2). While other works explore adapt-ing the VAE for point maps, they often require retraining the VAE [11], which would prevent us from leveraging the strong generative priors of existing models. The alternative, a 2D depth map, must be normalized to fit the VAE’s [−1, 1] range. Methods like Marigold [14, 15] use per-image normalization along the optical z-axis, which results in anisotropic deformations as in Fig. 2. Further-more, recovering a 3D shape from such a map is impos-sible without knowing the camera intrinsics. This estab-lishes the need for a VAE-friendly representation that pre-serves the 3D shape isotropically, motivating our proposal (iNOD, Sec 3.3). iNOD addresses these issues by isotropi-cally packing a distortion-free 3D shape into an image for-mat that is both robust to VAE compression and requires no camera intrinsics at inference time. 

## 3. Methods 

Given a single image of a person captured under unknown illumination, our goal is to jointly relight the person with a desired target environment E while also recovering their intrinsic albedo a and 3D geometry g. We formulate this joint relighting and reconstruction problem as a conditional multi-modal generation task. To enable high-resolution generation and leverage strong generative priors, we build our framework on a Video Latent Diffusion Transformer (DiT). This architectural choice is powerful, but it introduces three core technical challenges. First, the model must be flexible enough to generate and be conditioned on multiple, distinct modalities at once; we ad-dress this with our Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion design (Sec. 3.1). Second, we must represent 3D geometry in a “VAE-friendly” way that avoids the distortion of standard depth maps; we propose a novel representation, isotropic Normalized Orthographic Depth (iNOD) (Sec. 3.3) to solve this. Finally, we must learn photorealism when real-world images lack ground-truth geometry, which we solve with a Strategic Mixed-Data Training procedure (Sec. 3.4). 

3.1. Flexible Multi-Modal Diffusion 

Our goal of jointly modeling geometry and relighting re-quires an architecture that can process multiple distinct modalities at once (e.g., images, albedo, surface normal, and geometry). A Diffusion Transformer (DiT) is a natu-ral choice, as its dense self-attention mechanism allows for intensive information exchange between all modalities si-multaneously. Furthermore, operating in the latent space of a pretrained VAE enables high-resolution generation while preserving fine-grained details. We adapt pre-trained video DiT that denoises latent 

z∈RT ×H×W ×C , where T is temporal length, H and W are spatial resolution, C is latent channel dimension. Inspired by [9], we adapt it with a simple but effective modification: 

we repurpose the temporal dimension T as a modality di-mension M . This allows us to stack all our target modalities (albedo, normal, geometry, segmentation, relit image) and process them in parallel as if they were frames in a video. This “modality-as-time” design requires specific con-ditioning. We use a learnable modality type embedding 

cmodal ∈RM ×Ctype to distinguish which “frame” (modality) is 3🔥 optimizable          

> Relit Albedo Normal Dilated iNOD Mask
> ❄
> Relighting Intrinsics Decomposition
> 3D Geometry Reconstruction
> Training Inference
> s ng
> Multi-Modal DiT
> …
> 🔥 optimizable
> Ded iNOD Mask
> Relit

Multi-Modal Latent Diffusion     

> Multi-Modal Generation
> iNOD
> Training Inference
> ❄
> Encoder
> Segmentation (as condition)
> Available Modality during Inference (e.g. Segmentation, Normal) Input Image Environment Albedo
> ❄
> Enc
> Albedo (as target)
> Normal (as condition)
> iNOD (as target)
> Relit (as target)
> ❄
> Dec

Figure 3. The GeoRelight Pipeline. GeoRelight processes up to five target modalities, using cswitch to signal which ones are targets and conditions (the figure shows one specific usecase). It is guided by a global image condition zI and a specific illumination condition zE.

being processed. Before being passed to DiT blocks, each modality’s embedding is broadcast to RH×W ×Ctype and con-catenated channel-wise to its corresponding latent. Further-more, to ensure that a pixel at position (x,y) in one modality (e.g. relit image) can be spatially correlated with the same pixel in others (e.g. normal map) in the attention mecha-nism, we use a shared spatial positional embedding to re-place original temporal 3D RoPE [31] across all modalities, making the modality’s own position invariant. More specif-ically, we apply the same 2D RoPE to all modalities. Finally, the key to our framework’s flexibility is the modality switch mask cswitch ∈RH×W ×1. This binary mask, concatenated to each modality, signals whether it is a “clear” input condition (use 1) or a “noisy” target to be generated (use 0). This switch implicitly tells the model to either condition on this modality or to generate it. This mechanism is the core enabler for our strategic mixed-data training (Sec. 3.4) and allows for flexible, powerful control during inference, as demonstrated in our ablations. 

3.2. Joint Relighting and Reconstruction 

As illustrated in Figure 3, our model is designed to jointly denoise five target latent modalities from a single input im-age I: intrinsic albedo za, a segmentation mask zs, surface normals zn, geometric shape zg, and final relit image zIE .To guide this complex multi-modal generation, we intro-duce two distinct types of conditioning. We use the orig-inal input image as global condition . This image contains the core information about the subject’s identity, shape, and texture that all target modalities must share. Unlike UniRe-light [9], which treats the input as just another modality to denoise, we concatenate latent zI channel-wise to all five target modalities zm, ensuring its information is present in every step of the joint denoising process uniformly. The second is the illumination condition E, which is re-quired only for the relit image zIE . A key challenge is that 

E is a High Dynamic Range (HDR) map, which the pre-trained LDR-based VAE cannot encode faithfully. To solve this, we follow the established practice of [12, 22] and de-compose the HDR map into three LDR-compatible repre-sentations: a Reinhard tonemapped [30] panorama Eldr , a normalized log-intensity map Elog , and a directional map 

Edir . These are encoded into a joint lighting latent zE.This latent is concatenated only to the relit image latent 

zIE , while zero-padded placeholders are used for all other modalities to maintain a consistent tensor shape. Thus, the full input for any single modality m in our DiT is a stack containing its noisy latent zmτ , the global con-dition zI , its specific illumination condition (either zE or zeros), and our flexible conditioning embeddings cmodal and 

cswitch . The model is then optimized using a denoising score matching objective [13]. At inference, this design allows us to either generate all modalities from pure noise or, by us-ing the cswitch , provide any combination of clear modalities to guide the generation of the others. 

3.3. Isotropic Normalized Orthographic Depth 

As we established in Sec. 2.2 and 3.1, a VAE-friendly ge-ometry representation is critical for our joint model. Stan-dard point maps are corrupted by VAE encoding and nor-malized depth is anisotropic (Fig. 2). To solve this, we propose isotropic Normalized Orthographic Depth (iNOD), a simple yet effective representation that is dense, VAE-friendly, and perfectly preserves relative 3D geometry. The creation of an iNOD is straightforward. Given ground-truth metric depth and camera intrinsics (available during synthetic data creation), we first unproject the pix-els to acquire a metric 3D point cloud. The key step is our isotropic 3D normalization: instead of scaling only the z-axis, we scale the entire 3D geometry to fit within a [-1, 1] bounding box based on its longest edge. This operation dis-cards absolute scale but maintains the relative 3D geometry and aspect ratio of the subject. From this normalized 3D shape, we orthographically project it onto the XY-plane by simply taking the z-value of each point. This final ortho-graphic depth map is naturally in the [-1, 1] range required by the pretrained VAE. We then assign this z-value back to the corresponding pixel to create a dense, pixel-aligned 2D map that represents a distortion-free 3D shape. This iNOD representation has all the properties we re-quire. It is a VAE-friendly 2D image with 1-DoF that eliminates the noise artifacts seen in point map encoding with 3-DoF. Most importantly, because the normalization is isotropic, the 3D non-distorted shape can be recovered with a simple orthographic unprojection, eliminating the need for camera intrinsics during inference, which is a major ad-vantage over standard depth maps. We find that VAE com-pression can create boundary artifacts due to nearest neigh-bor sampling, so we apply a simple dilation to the iNOD foreground, which results in a clean and robust geometry 4High Resolution,        

> GT Our
> Not Available
> Not Available
> /home/yuxuanxue/Downloads/1024/auto-labeling/dataloader_lighticon_autolabeling/debug_georelight_lighticon_autolabeling_1/
> /home/yuxuanxue/Downloads/1024/auto-labeling/example_dataloading/
> /home/yuxuanxue/Downloads/1028/debug_georelight_itw_autolabeling/
> Synthetic
> Light Stage
> In-the-wild
> Input Environment Segmentation Relit Albedo Normal Dilated iNOD Decoded 3D Geometry from iNOD (for reference)
> Auto-Labeled Intrinsics

Figure 4. Our Strategic Mixed-Data Training Sources. We combine (a) fully-labeled Synthetic data, (b) Light Stage data with paired lighting, and (c) In-the-wild data. We use our synthetic data pre-trained model to auto-label intrinsics for (b) and (c).                                           

> Mode Clear Latent Noisy Latent Global Condition Dataset Default -zall zI,zESynth ,Dome
> Rendering za,zn,zg,zszIEzESynth ,Dome
> Intrinsic →Relit za,zn,zg,zszIE-ITW
> Geometry →Relit zn,zg,zszIE,zazESynth ,Dome
> Relit →Geometry zIE,za,zszn,zg-Synth

Table 1. Strategic training for mixing synthetic and real data. 

boundary after decoding shown in Fig. 2. Please refer to our supplementary for detailed instructions on creating iNOD. 

3.4. Strategic Mixed Post-Training 

A fundamental challenge for using synthetic data is the “synthetic-real gap”. Synthetic data provides perfect ground-truth labels but it may result in a model that achieves less photorealism. Conversely, real-world images are pho-torealistic but lack the ground-truth intrinsics and geometry labels, and are extremely complicated to acquire. To solve this, we first create a hybrid dataset. In our observation, synthetic trained model achieves good intrin-sics and geometry recovery. Hence, we leverage our ini-tially trained synthetic model to “auto-label” [22] our real-world data sources: a high-quality light stage data ( Dome )as in [25, 37] and a large-scale in-the-wild dataset ( ITW )from [19, 21]. This step provides us with pseudo-ground-truth intrinsics ( za, zn, zg, zs ) for our photorealistic data. Our light stage data contains paired relit images with light position and intensity from controllable LEDs. How-ever, the ITW data lacks paired relit images and target il-lumination. We therefore designed a strategic mixed post-training approach, detailed in Table 1, which leverages the full flexibility of our multi-modal architecture (Sec. 3.1). Instead of one monolithic task, we train the model on dif-ferent tasks tailored to the strengths of each data source. On our Synth and Dome datasets, where we have com-plete labels, we train the full joint pipeline using the “De-fault” and “Rendering” modes. This teaches the model the physical relationships between geometry, intrinsics, and lighting. For images in ITW , we use a specialized “Intrinsic →Relit” task. In this mode, we provide our auto-labeled intrinsics as a clear condition (by setting cswitch = 1 )and task the model with denoising only the original, pho-torealistic image zIE . Unavailable conditions such as input 

I and illumination E are dropped as 0. This crucial step directly teaches the model how to synthesize photorealistic human appearance from its own intrinsic predictions, us-ing real-world images as the target, without ever needing a ground-truth relit pair. This strategic use of our flexible ar-chitecture allows the model to learn physical accuracy from synthetic data while simultaneously learning complex, re-alistic appearance from in-the-wild data, all within a single unified framework. 

## 4. Experiments 

4.1. Experiment Settings 

Implementation Details We initialize our DiT from the inverse rendering model of DiffusionRenderer-Cosmos-7B [22] and use the pretrained Cosmos causal VAE, which remains frozen. Our training is conducted in two stages. First, we train purely on synthetic data for 30K steps to learn the fundamental disentanglement of intrinsics and re-lighting. We then use this model to "auto-label" our real-world datasets. Then, we apply our strategic mixed-data training (Sec. 3.4) for 10K steps, training on a combined dataset of synthetic and real data. A training batch contains 128 samples at resolution of 832 ×1280 pixels from our hy-brid dataset. The total training of two stages takes around 5 days on 64 A100 GPUs. Our 7B-parameter DiT requires 5High          

> w/o Geometry Input
> Not Available
> Joint Modeling
> Relit Albedo Normal Relit Albedo (a) Geometry is essential for relighting. Our full "Joint Modeling" (right) captures 3D-dependent effects (wrinkles, shadows) absent in the "w/o Geom-etry" baseline (left). Input w/ novel Relit Joint Modeling
> process_SUBJECT_C006_POSE_02_Cam10/
> Novel Relit as clear latent Generated Normal Generated Normal
> (b) Relighting provides shape-from-shading. Given a uniformly lit input (left), a smooth normal is produced (middle). A relit as condition provides novel shading cues and enhances high-frequency normal generation (right).

Figure 5. Ablation studies validating the synergy of joint modeling.                                         

> Relighting Normal Point Ablation PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓Ang. ↓CD. ↓
> w/o Geometry 21.19 0.976 0.0286 --w/ GT Geometry 26.96 0.986 0.0138 --Joint Modeling 27.49 0.985 0.0149 --
> w/o Appearance ---12.24 1.00 w/ GT Appearance ---8.55 0.66 Joint Modeling ---9.10 0.58

Table 2. Ablation Study on the Synergy of Joint Modeling. We validate our core claims on the synthetic dataset. First ablation proves that geometry is essential for high-fidelity relighting. Sec-ond ablation proves that relighting provides shape-from-shading cues that improve geometry. 

17.5 GB VRAM for inference on a single A100 GPU, gen-erating all five modalities in approximately 35 seconds per image. Please refer to supplementary for more details in implementation and training. 

Evaluation Details First we evaluate on synthetic data, which contains 42 identities with ground-truth for all modalities from our synthetic dataset. Then, we evaluate on 50 identities from our light stage captures. We also eval-uate on HumanOLAT [32]. Following official instruction, we generate ground-truth relit images by combining pro-vided OLAT data. We provide extensive qualitative results on in-the-wild images here and in our supplementary. For relighting, we quantitatively compare against open-source baselines [12, 22, 45, 47] with PSNR, LPIPS, and RMSE computed on foreground subject. We also provide qualitative comparison and user study with [26]. For ge-ometry, we compare against feed-forward point map pre-dictors [33, 35]. We report Chamfer distance and F-score on the normalized and ICP-aligned [1] geometry to ground-truth shape. For intrinsics, we evaluate normal estimation against [16, 22, 35, 46] with angular error and RMSE. For albedo estimation we compare against [22, 46] using PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. Please refer to our supplementary for de-tailed evaluation protocol. 

4.2. Ablation Studies: Validating our Design 

Before comparing to external baselines, we first validate the core claims of our paper: that our multi-modal syner-getic generation of geometry and relighting, and mixed-data strategy are helpful for high-quality performance. 

Geometry is essential for Relighting We compare three different modes: Joint Modeling (generating geometry and relighting together); w/GT Geometry (take ground-truth ge-ometry as clear latent and set up switch cswitch = 1 to gener-ate relit image); w/o Geometry (only generate relit without joint generation of geometry). Tab. 2 and Fig. 5a clearly demonstrates how important the geometry information is for relighting: joint modeling of geometry leads to fine-grained details such as shadow and clothing wrinkles, while the "w/o Geometry" mode fails to capture these geometry-dependent effects. Please refer to supplementary for details. 

Relighting provides shape-from-shading To prove this, we conduct the reverse experiment. We compare our "Joint Modeling" mode against generation "w/o Appearance" and "w/ GT Appearance". Figure 5b shows that when the model is given a ground-truth relit image from HumanOLAT as a clear latent condition, it generates a much more detailed and accurate normal map. This demonstrates that the ap-pearance of shading provides critical information that our model successfully uses to refine geometry estimation. 

In-the-wild data corrects lighting bias We further analyze the specific contribution of our in-the-wild ( ITW ) data. As shown in Fig. 9, training with only Synth +Dome data al-ready improves realism over synthetic-only training, but in-troduces a “dark bias” in the relit outputs. This is because the light stage captures use sparse LED activations (10-20 out of 1024 lights), resulting in predominantly dark training images that skew the model’s output distribution. Incorpo-rating large-scale ITW data with diverse, real-world lighting conditions corrects this bias, producing relit images with balanced and natural illumination. 

Generalizing iNOD Beyond Humans While we focus on human subjects in this work, iNOD is a general-purpose representation that is not inherently limited to any spe-cific category. In supplementary, we validate that iNOD faithfully encodes and decodes 3D geometry for subjects with increasing Depth-to-Height (D:H) ratios, from humans (∼0.1) to objects like buildings (3.0). The representation 6High R       

> DR Our Input Background IC-Light NeuralGaffer DiLightNet GT
> Not Available
> Not Available
> Not Available

Figure 6. Qualitative comparison on relighting. Our model (right) produces more physically-plausible results compared to baselines on both the HumanOLAT dataset [32] and challenging in-the-wild images. Please refer to our supplementary for more results 1.                                                                                      

> Synthetic Data LightStage Data HumanOLAT [32] Method PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓RMSE ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓RMSE ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓RMSE ↓
> IC-Light 18 .49 0.880 0.113 0.222 20 .90 0.859 0.119 0.172 19 .79 0.930 0.086 0.185
> NeuralGaffer 18 .84 0.929 0.105 0.220 18 .88 0.893 0.097 0.222 20 .77 0.948 0.085 0.165
> DiLightNet 14 .51 0.859 0.121 0.355 18 .03 0.870 0.105 0.243 14 .23 0.905 0.094 0.337
> DiffusionRenderer 19 .28 0.886 0.119 0.203 21 .09 0.862 0.120 0.169 17 .58 0.899 0.100 0.229
> GeoRelight 27.22 0.941 0.057 0.079 25.87 0.907 0.086 0.092 21.17 0.935 0.086 0.161

Table 3. Relighting evaluation for human images. Our method achieves state-of-the-art relighting performance. Although NeuralGaffer achieves higher metric on HumanOLAT, it cannot faithfully recover details in relit images. More comparisons are in supplementary. 

remains effective as long as the D:H ratio is moderate; extremely elongated scenes (e.g., tunnels with D:H >10) would compress the depth range, potentially degrading re-construction quality. Consequently, the generalizability of iNOD unlocks the potential of our framework for joint re-lighting, intrinsic decomposition, and 3D reconstruction in broader object-centric domains. 

4.3. Comparison with State-of-the-art 

Relighting Performance We first evaluate our primary task of relighting. Tab. 3 shows the quantitative comparison on our synthetic, light stage, and HumanOLAT datasets. Our method significantly outperforms all open-source general-purpose baselines, including DiffusionRenderer (DR), Neu-ralGaffer, and DiLightNet, across all datasets and metrics. We observe that the gap on HumanOLAT is smaller than our hold-out evaluation data, which can be possible due to the artifacts in the ground-truth. Due to data license limitation, we could not obtain quantitative results for closed-source 

> 1The images in Figures 1, 6 (second and third row), 7, 8, and 9 are synthetic images created using a generative model.

methods [26], we conduct a user study on in-the-wild infer-ence in supplementary. Fig. 6 provides a qualitative com-parison, showing that our model produces more realistic and detailed results. Our qualitative results on in-the-wild images (Fig. 6, row 3) confirm this. Our method gener-ates physically-plausible shading and shadows that are con-sistent with the new illumination, while other methods like IC-Light and DiLightNet produce artifacts or fail to match the illumination. 

Geometric & Intrinsic Estimation Performance We re-port the quantitative comparison of fullbody and portrait re-construction on our synthetic data in Tab. 4. We achieve superior performance compared to SoTA general purpose reconstructor VGGT [33] and MoGe2 [35]. Fig. 8 quali-tatively confirms this, showing our model captures detailed shapes where others produce distorted or over-flattend re-sults. Similarly, Tab. 5 demonstrates our leadership in esti-mation of albedo and surface normal. Fig. 7 shows that our model can recover fine-grained surface details in clothing, skin, and hair. 7DR RGB-X Sapiens Input MoGe2 Our DR RGB-X Sapiens Input MoGe2 Our Figure 7. Qualitative comparison of estimated normal. Our model outperforms all baselines and consistently achieves sharper and high-frequency details such as eyes, skin, and hair. Please zoom in for details. VGGT MoGe2 VGGT Our MoGe2 Our Input Input 

Figure 8. Qualitative comparison on geometry reconstruction. Our joint model (right) reconstructs fine-grained 3D shapes. In contrast, specialized geometry estimators like VGGT [33] and MoGe2 [35] produce distorted or over-smoothed point clouds on these in-the-wild images, demonstrating the superior performance of high-frequency details modeling of our iNOD with latent generative models.  

> Input Synth Synth Dome Synth Dome ITW

Figure 9. Benefit of In-the-Wild Data. Using only Synth un-covers gaps in the data like the lack of mixed colored beards. Adding Dome data fixes that but produces unrealistic brightness (middle) due to the unnatural LED activation (either very sparse or fully lit) in light stage captures. Adding large-scale ITW data corrects this bias, yielding balanced and realistic lighting (right).                             

> Method Acc. ↓Comp. ↓CD ↓F-Score ↑Prec. ↑Rec. ↑
> VGGT 4.06 2.68 3.37 21.05 18.87 23.98 MoGe2 4.07 3.02 3.54 23.96 23.71 24.41
> GeoRelight 0.71 0.82 0.766 81.56 84.24 79.09

Table 4. Geometric Shape Estimation evaluation . GeoRelight 

outperforms specialized, single-task SoTA geometry estimators. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose GeoRelight , a unified framework that, for the first time, jointly generates photorealistic relit images and reconstructs high-fidelity 3D geometry within Albedo Normal Method PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ Ang. ↓ RMSE ↓                         

> Sapiens ---13.99 0.319 MoGe2 ---16.33 0.344 RGB-X 15.45 0.909 0.093 21.12 0.420 DiffusionRenderer 19.46 0.892 0.115 20.44 0.420
> GeoRelight 28.07 0.943 0.057 8.64 0.211

Table 5. Albedo and Normal disentanglement evaluation. Geo-Relight achieves state-of-the-art albedo and normal estimation. 

a single multi-modal diffusion transformer. Our solution is enabled by three key contributions: (1) a flexible DiT ar-chitecture that processes modalities in parallel; (2) iNOD, a novel, distortion-free geometry representation compati-ble with pretrained VAEs; and (3) a strategic mixed-data training method that leverages Dome and in-the-wild data to bridge the synthetic-real gap. Our experiments proved our core thesis: joint modeling is synergistic, and our model achieves state-of-the-art results in not just relighting, but also in geometry and intrinsic estimation, outperforming specialized, single-task methods. While GeoRelight is a ro-bust single-image method, it does not yet model temporal consistency. As our core DiT is built from a video model, a clear direction for future work is to extend our joint frame-work to video relighting and reconstruction. Besides, joint estimating geometry and appearance for relightable 3D hu-man generation [41–43] can be a downstream application. 8Supplementary Material 

In this supplementary document, we provide further details about the implementation details, training data, evaluation protocol, etc. We also show additional comparison with state-of-the-art approaches. Please refer to our supplemen-tary video for additional visualization of our results. Fi-nally, we discuss limitations of our model and potential fu-ture works. 

## 6. Additional Implementation Details 

This section provides further details on our network archi-tecture and training procedure, expanding on Sec. 4.1 of the main paper. 

6.1. Model Architecture 

Base Model Our model’s architecture is a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [29]. We initialize our weights from the publicly available inverse rendering model of DiffusionRenderer-Cosmos-7B [22], which is built upon the Cosmos-Predict-1 7B DiT [27]. 

Causal VAE Latent Space We operate in the latent space of the pretrained Cosmos causal VAE [27], which can pro-cess both image or videos. The VAE remains frozen during our training. This VAE has a spatial compression factor of 8. Therefore, our input images at a training resolution of 832 × 1280 pixels are encoded into a latent space of 

104 × 160 . The channel dimension is 16. All five target modalities ( za, zn, zg, zs, zIE ) and the global image condi-tion ( zI) and illumination condition ( zE) share this latent resolution. Target Modality Latent  

> …
> 🔥 optimizable
> Multi-Modal DiT
> Input Image Condition
> Illumination Condition
> Type Embedding
> Modality Switch
> Modality 5
> …
> Modality 1
> Target Modality Latent
> Input Image Condition
> Illumination Condition
> Type Embedding
> Modality Switch

Figure 10. Conditioning on the modality latent. 

Each modality latent after conditioning have the shape 

RH×W ×C(16+16+3 ∗16+3+1) . Different modalities are con-catenated "temporal-wise" to a sample RM ×H×W ×C in one batch. 

6.2. Detailed DiT Conditioning 

As illustrated in Fig. 10, our architecture adapts a standard DiT block to accept our multi-modal conditioning. The total input to the DiT for a single modality m is a channel-wise concatenation of several features that are added to the noisy latent zmτ before the first DiT block. • Global Condition zI: The VAE-encoded latent of the in-put image I. This is concatenated to all five target modal-ities to provide shared identity and shape information. • Illumination Condition ( zE): The VAE-encoded latent of the three LDR light maps ( Eldr , Elog , Edir ). This is con-catenated only to the relit image latent zIE and is zero-padded for all other modalities. • Modality Type Embedding ( cmodal ): A learnable embed-ding of shape RM ×Ctype (where M =5, Ctype = 3 ) that is broadcast to the latent spatial resolution and concate-nated. This informs the model which modality it is cur-rently processing (e.g., albedo vs. normal). • Modality Switch Mask ( cswitch ): A binary mask of shape 

RH×W ×1 that is broadcast and concatenated. It sig-nals whether the modality is a "clear" condition (1) or a "noisy" target (0). These concatenated features ∈ RH×W ×(16+16+3 ∗16+3+1) 

are then processed by the DiT. We replace the original 3D RoPE positional embeddings with a shared 2D RoPE [31] that is applied to all modalities. This ensures that spatial po-sition (x,y) is aligned across all modalities, which is critical for learning cross-modal correlations. 

6.3. Training Details 

Hardware and Optimizer Our model is trained on 64 NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs. We use the AdamW [18] op-timizer with a constant learning rate of 2 × 10 −5, a weight decay of 0.01, and enable bfloat16 mixed-precision train-ing. Our total effective batch size is 128, distributed across all GPUs. 

Two Stage Training As described in the main paper (Sec 4.1), our training is conducted in two distinct stages: 1. Stage 1 (Synthetic Pre-training): We first train the model for 30,000 steps exclusively on our synthetic Synth 

dataset. This stage teaches the model the fundamen-tal disentanglement of intrinsics, geometry, and lighting. The resulting model from this stage is then used as our "auto-labeler" for the real-world datasets. 2. Stage 2 (Mixed Post-Training): We then finetune the model from Stage 1 for an additional 10,000 steps. In this stage, we train on a combined hybrid dataset of synthetic, light stage, and in-the-wild data, applying the strategic tasks outlined in our main paper’s Table 1. The batch is composed by sampling from our datasets with 9the following probabilities: 33% Synth , 35% Dome ,32% ITW .

6.4. Inference Runtime 

We report our method’s inference speed on a single NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU. For a single input image at our test resolution of 832 × 1280 , the full joint-generation pro-cess takes approximately 35 seconds. This time include 35 diffusion sampling steps, VAE decoding time, and I/O time for saving the results. 

6.5. Ablation Details 

We provide more details about implementation of ablation study in main paper section 4.2. The quantitative ablation study was reported on full-body subset of our synthetic eval-uation dataset because full-body images contain more wrin-kles compared to face-only subset. 

Geometry is essential for Relighting We compare three distinct modes to validate this claim: • Joint Modeling: The model generates all five modalities (relit image, albedo, normal, segmentation, and geome-try) simultaneously from noise. • w/ GT Geometry: We replace the initial noise of the geometry modalities (iNOD, normal, segmentation) with the ground-truth latent representations. We set their cor-responding switch masks to cswitch = 1 (condition) and keep them fixed (clear) during the reverse sampling pro-cess, forcing the model to generate the relit image condi-tioned on perfect geometry. • w/o Geometry: We disable the generation of geometry modalities. To keep the input tensor dimensions consis-tent with our architecture, we replace the geometry la-tents with zero-tensors. This formulation is analogous to the dropped-condition scenario in classifier-free guid-ance [10], effectively removing geometric guidance from the generation process. 

Relighting helps Shape-from-Shading. To validate the synergistic effect of appearance on geometry, we compare the following modes: • w/o Appearance: We isolate the geometry generation by suppressing the relighting modality. Similar to the “w/o Geometry” setting, we replace the relit image latent zIE

and the illumination condition zE with zero-tensors, ef-fectively forcing the model to hallucinate geometry from the input image I alone, without any shading cues from the new lighting context. • w/ GT Appearance: We provide the ground-truth relit image as a strong conditioning signal. We encode the GT relit image into latent space and set its switch mask to 

cswitch = 1 . This allows the model to explicitly use the LED Positions Processed Environment Map   

> Figure 11. Processed Environment Illumination from Light-Stage. From the 3-dimensional LED positions, we project it to a latlong image to model the environement map.

shading and shadows present in the target relit image to refine the surface normals and iNOD geometry. 

## 7. Detailed Data Creation and Sources 

In this section, we provide a detailed breakdown of the three data sources used in our hybrid dataset, as first introduced in Sec. 3.4 of the main paper and visually summarized in our main paper’s Figure 4. 

7.1. Synthetic Data 

The synthetic dataset forms the foundation of our method. Its primary purpose is to provide a large corpus of physically-accurate, fully-labeled data to train our Stage 1 model. We create 1000 high-quality, artist-created 3D human meshes, which contain detailed facial components (eyes, teeth, hair). We augment it to 8000 identities by rig-ging for pose variation. We pair these with a library of high-quality PBR texture maps for clothing (albedo, nor-mal, roughness). Our system is built with Blender, and images are ren-dered with the Cycles renderer. For each of the 8000 ap-pearance samples, we render it under 400 random HDR environment maps, creating a large-scale training set. For each rendered scene, we save all five of our target modal-ities: the relit image ( IE), albedo ( a), segmentation mask (s), surface normals ( n), and our novel iNOD geometry ( g), which is computed from the ground-truth metric depth and camera intrinsics. As noted in our main paper, this synthetic-only model yields satisfactory intrinsics but lacks photorealism in the final relit image, which motivates our hybrid-data approach. 

7.2. Light Stage Data 

The Dome dataset is our high-quality, real-world dataset that acts as a bridge between synthetic data and in-the-wild images. It is sourced from the Codec Avatar Studio [25] and Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars [37] datasets. 10 Figure 12. Robustness of our Auto-Labeler. Our auto-labeled albedo (shown) and other intrinsics are consistent across multiple views of the same subject from our Dome dataset, demonstrating the high quality of our pseudo-ground-truth. 

Paired Data Creation This dataset is critical because its light stage capture setup, which employs 1024 individually controllable white LED light sources with known locations, allows us to create paired real-world training data. The captured videos consist of alternating fully-lit frames and partially-lit frames (random 10-20 lights) at 60 Hz. Due to fast motion, we cannot reliably warp frames to perform traditional image-based relighting as in [17, 26, 28]. Hence, we treat neighboring frames as the paired in-put and relit image. To generate the corresponding illumi-nation condition E, we map the 3D LED light locations and intensities from the partially-lit frame to an equirectangular image (Fig. 11, simulating a sparse environment map. This process provides us with realistic, photometrically-aligned pairs of (Input, Target Light, Target Relit Image), which we use for the "Default" and "Rendering" training modes (Ta-ble 1 in main paper). 

7.3. In-the-wild Data 

To further enhance diversity and photorealism, we use a large-scale in-the-wild dataset. We sample 10K human im-ages from the CosmicMan [21] and ReLaion [19] datasets as our data pool. 

Label Scarcity This dataset is defined by what it lacks. Unlike Synth and Dome , ITW images have no ground-truth intrinsics, no paired relit image, and no known il-lumination condition E. It is used exclusively for our "Intrinsic →Relit" task. 

7.4. Auto-Labeling Process 

The "auto-labeling" process is the important component of our strategic mixed-data training, inspired by [22, 26]. We use the model trained exclusively on our Synth dataset (Stage 1) as our "auto-labeler." We run this model in inference mode over our entire Dome and ITW datasets. For each real-world image, we generate and save the four corresponding pseudo-ground-truth intrinsic maps: albedo ( za), segmentation mask ( zs), surface normals ( zn), and our iNOD geometry ( zg). As shown in Fig 12, this auto-labeler is surprisingly robust, generating high-quality, view-consistent intrinsics even for real-world subjects. This process is what enables us to use the Dome and ITW datasets for our advanced training tasks in Stage 2. 

## 8. Additional Details on iNOD 

Our novel geometry representation, isotropic Normalized Orthographic Depth (iNOD), is a core contribution of our work. Unlike point map which is unsuitable for latent dif-fusion due to the noise introduced after encoding and de-coding (Fig. 13), our iNOD is naturally suitable for being applied in latent diffusion model. We provide a more de-tailed algorithm for its creation and a justification for our dilation-based boundary refinement. 

8.1. iNOD Creation Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 iNOD Creation from a Metric Depth Map  

> 1:

Input: metric_depth (H, W), cam_intrinsics 

(K)  

> 2:

Output: inod_map (H, W)  

> 3: 4:

Step 1: Unproject to 3D point cloud  

> 5:

pixels_uv ← create_pixel_grid (H, W)  

> 6:

cam_points ← unproject (pixels_uv ,

metric_depth , K) 

> 7: 8:

Step 2: Find scaling factor for isotropic normalization  

> 9:

min_bound ← min_axis (cam_points.xyz ) 

> 10:

max_bound ← max_axis (cam_points.xyz ) 

> 11:

max_edge ← max (max_bound - min_bound ) 

> 12: 13:

Step 3: Apply isotropic normalization  

> 14:

center ← (min_bound + max_bound ) / 2  

> 15:

norm_points ← (cam_points.xyz - center ) / 

max_edge  

> 16: 17:

Step 4: Create map via orthographic projection  

> 18:

iNOD ← create_empty_map (H, W, value = 0)  

> 19:

for i ← 1 to num_points do  

> 20:

u, v ← pixels_uv [i] 

> 21:

inod_map [v, u] ← norm_points.z [i]  

> 22:

end for  

> 23: 24:

return iNOD 

As described in the main paper (Sec. 3.3), iNOD is gen-erated from a source 3D point cloud. For our Synth data, this is computed from the ground-truth metric depth and known camera intrinsics. The process, detailed in Algo-rithm 1, is designed to be simple, fast, and distortion-free. 11 Figure 13. Limitation of Point Map in Latent Space. As a popular geometry representation [33, 36] in image sapce, point map shows strong limitation in latent space. Although visually the point map looks similar before and after VAE, the boundary lost huge precision (please zoom in) and it contains much noise after VAE. 

The key steps are (1) Unprojection to a metrically-accurate 3D point cloud, (2) Isotropic Normalization where the entire point cloud is scaled to fit a [−1, 1] cube based on its longest axis, and (3) Orthographic Projection where we simply take the z-value of the normalized points and write it into a 2D map. This process preserves the relative 3D geometry and aspect ratio of the subject while ensuring the final 2D map is in a VAE-friendly [−1, 1] range. 

8.2. Dilation for VAE Artifacts 

As noted in the main paper (Sec. 3.3) and visually demon-strated in our main paper’s Fig. 2, the pretrained Cosmos VAE [27], like most VAEs, can struggle with the extremely sharp boundaries of a foreground silhouette against a blank background. When a standard iNOD map is passed through the VAE (encoded and then decoded), this compression can intro-duce minor "ringing" or noise artifacts at the very edge of the geometry. To solve this and ensure a clean, robust geo-metric boundary after decoding, we apply a simple 2D mor-phological dilation operation to the iNOD map before it is passed to the VAE. We use the assign neighbor iNOD value to dilated pixels. The background pixels are assigned to 0. This slightly thickens the silhouette’s boundary, providing a small buffer that is more robust to the VAE’s lossy com-pression. After decoding, we use original mask to "cut off" the dilated region which contains noise. Then we obtain noise-free iNOD geometry. The effectiveness of this simple step is shown in Fig.2 in main paper. The non-dilated iNOD produces noticeable boundary artifacts after being decoded, while the dilated version results in a clean, sharp, and artifact-free geomet-ric boundary. 

## 9. Evaluation Details 

This section provides additional specifics on the baseline configurations and metric implementations used for the comparisons in our main paper (Sec 4.3). To ensure a fair and reproducible comparison, we used publicly available code and pretrained models for all base-lines wherever possible. We also tried our best effort for evaluating close-sourced human-centric relighting methods by contacting their authors. Due to license of our evalua-tion data [32], we are prohibited to redistribute any of them to conduct quantitative comparison. Hence, we share our in-the-wild evaluation images and focus on qualitative com-parison and user study with them. 

9.1. Baseline Configurations 

Appearance Baselines For methods taking square im-ages [12, 45, 46] as input, we pad our vertical image hor-izontally and resize to the desired input resolution. For oth-ers we directly resize our image into their desired resolu-tion. For DiLightNet [45] which takes additional text prompt as input, we use the unified prompt "A real photo of a hu-man". For IC-Light [47] which takes background image in-stead of environment map as input, we render background image from conditioning environment map using Blender and use as its input. For closed-source baselines, we get reply from authors of LuxPostFacto [26] and deeply appreciate them for sharing inference results on face cropped in-the-wild images with us. LuxPostFacto is a face-centric relighting methods and can have downgrading performance when the input face crop is small or blurry. For TotalRelighting [28], Synth-Light [6], and SwitchLight [17], we cannot get reply from authors on time and will include the comparison at first mo-ment when we obtain their inference results from authors. 

Geometry Baselines For VGGT [33], we use the 1B model and pad our input image into square format and resize to the desired input resolution. For MoGe2 [35] we use the largest model which has 331M parameters and supports metric-scale reconstruction and normal estimation. For Sapiens [16], we use the normal normal estimator with 2B parameters. 

9.2. Metric Implementation Details 

Relighting and Albedo Evaluation To mitigate the fac-tor of scale ambiguity in lighting and albedo, we follow the protocol from DiffusionRenderer [22] and apply chro-matic alignment (a scale-invariant evaluation) between the ground-truth and predicted images for all evaluated meth-ods. All metrics are computed on the foreground pixels. 

Geometry (Point Cloud) Evaluation As described in the main paper, we compare against feed-forward estimators (VGGT, MoGe2) that predict point maps. Our evaluation process is as follows: 12 1. Normalize both the predicted and ground-truth point clouds to fit within a shared [−1, 1] 3 bounding box. 2. Align the predicted shape to the ground-truth shape us-ing the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm [1]. 3. Calculate all geometry metrics (CD, F-Score) based on these normalized and aligned shapes. 

Normal Evaluation For surface normal evaluation, all metrics (Angular Error, RMSE) are computed on the fore-ground pixels using the ground-truth segmentation mask 

## 10. Additional Results 

10.1. User Study 

GeoRelight is capable of jointly generating all five modal-ities in parallel from a single input image: a high-fidelity relit image under novel illumination, a clean albedo map, a detailed surface normal map, a segmentation mask, and a robust 3D reconstruction. The model generalizes well to out-of-distribution subjects, robustly handling a wide variety of ages, accessories, complex clothing, and non-standard poses. Furthermore, GeoRelight supports control-lable generation: rotating the target environment map pro-duces physically-plausible relit images with dynamic shad-ows, while the estimated albedo and normal maps remain stable, and scaling the light intensity correctly modulates the brightness and shadow depth. We refer readers to our supplementary video for extensive visualization of joint generation results and controllable relighting. As mentioned in 9.1, a direct quantitative comparison with closed-source methods like LuxPostFacto [26] is not feasible due to data license restrictions. Hence, we conduct a user study to evaluate the performance. We asked 32 participants to evaluate a set of 20 ran-domly selected subjects from our in-the-wild test set. The study was divided into two tasks. The first task was a two-alternative forced-choice (2AFC) task for relighting. Partic-ipants were shown the input image and environment map, followed by the relit results from our GeoRelight and Lux-PostFacto [26], and were asked, "Which relit image is bet-ter? Please focus on details such as hair and face". The second task was a three-alternative forced-choice (3AFC) task for geometry. Participants were shown the results from GeoRelight, MoGe2 [35], and VGGT [33]. To fairly evalu-ate the 3D shape, we provided rotating animations of each reconstruction and asked, "Which 3D reconstruction is bet-ter? Please focus on details such as eyes and hair". We randomize the order of each method in each question. We collected a total of 640 votes (32 participants × 20 comparisons) for each task. The results demonstrate an overwhelming preference for our method. For relighting, in the comparison against LuxPostFacto, GeoRelight was pre-ferred in 93 .8% (596.5) of votes, while LuxPostFacto was preferred in only 6.2% (43.5) of votes. For geometry, in the reconstruction task, GeoRelight was preferred in 93 .4% 

(598.0) of votes, decisively outperforming both MoGe2 at 

5.2% (33.0) and VGGT at 1.4% (9.0). Our user study measures perceived photorealism and ge-ometric accuracy, which strongly validates our model’s su-perior performance, aligning with the quantitative metrics in the main paper. 

10.2. Qualitative Comparison on Relighting 

In Figure 14, we provide a qualitative comparison for the task of relighting on the HumanOLAT dataset. We com-pare GeoRelight against state-of-the-art methods, includ-ing DiffusionRenderer (DR) [22], IC-Light [47], Neural-Gaffer [12], and DiLightNet [45]. Our method consistently demonstrates superior photore-alism and physical plausibility. We observe that many base-lines struggle with these examples. DiffusionRenderer of-ten produces results that are overly dark or lack contrast. DiLightNet shows significant instability, frequently intro-ducing severe color artifacts. Methods like IC-Light and NeuralGaffer can struggle with correct exposure, color bal-ance, or preserving fine details. In contrast, GeoRelight produces relit images that are free of artifacts and well-harmonized with the target illu-mination. Our method properly handles complex interac-tions between light, hair, and clothing, and accurately ren-ders shadows consistent with the target environment map. 

10.3. Qualitative Comparison on Reconstruction 

We compare our 3D reconstruction against the leading feed-forward geometry estimators, VGGT [33] and MoGe2 [35]. We also provide qualitative comparison on geometry recon-struction in the main paper (Fig. 7). We observe that VGGT often produces overly smooth or “blobby” reconstructions. It captures the general human form but fails to preserve fine-grained details such as cloth-ing folds, hair, or accessories. While MoGe2 is able to capture more high-frequency de-tail, it frequently introduces significant noise, “floater” arti-facts, and non-manifold holes in the geometry. This results in a brittle and visually unappealing surface. GeoRelight successfully combines the strengths of both approaches. Our reconstructions are both robustly complete and rich in sharp detail. Our method accurately captures complex surfaces like clothing wrinkles, accessories, and hair, all while maintaining a coherent and clean 3D mesh. Notably, our reconstructions are comparable in quality to methods that use explicit surface representations such as neural surface fields [39], while being generated in a sin-gle forward pass without iterative optimization. We refer readers to our supplementary video, which shows these 3D reconstructions as rotating animations for a full multi-view 13 High R         

> DR Our Input Background IC-Light NeuralGaffer DiLightNet GT
> Not Available Figure 14. Qualitative comparison on relighting on HumanOLAT. Our model (right) produces more physically-plausible results compared to open-source baselines.

comparison. 

## 11. Extension to Video Relighting 

GeoRelight is primarily designed for single-image relight-ing and reconstruction by repurposing the temporal dimen-sion T of a pretrained video DiT as a modality dimension 

M . However, the framework can be naturally extended to multi-modal video relighting with minimal architectural modification. 

Architecture Modification The key change is in the po-sitional encoding. In our static model, we apply a shared 2D RoPE [31] ( H×W ) identically across all M modalities to ensure spatial alignment. For the video extension, we re-place this with a shared 3D RoPE ( T ×H×W ) across all M

modalities. This allows the model to reason about both spa-tial correlations across modalities and temporal consistency across frames, while still maintaining per-modality spatial alignment. 

Preliminary Experiment To validate this approach, we generated 4,000 synthetic human videos and trained a video variant of GeoRelight. Due to computational constraints, we use 17-frame videos at 1280 ×832 resolution, which are compressed to 3×160 ×104 latents using the Cosmos 

8×8×8 causal VAE [27]. The model is initialized from our trained static GeoRelight weights. Our preliminary results show that this video extension achieves meaningful tempo-ral consistency for multi-modal video relighting, confirm-ing that the architecture supports this generalization. A full exploration of video relighting and reconstruction is an ex-citing direction for future work. Furthermore, our disen-tangled geometry and appearance outputs could serve as a foundation for downstream tasks such as 3D-consistent avatar creation [41, 43] and controllable 3D human genera-tion [42]. 

## 12. Limitations and Failure Cases 

While GeoRelight demonstrates state-of-the-art perfor-mance and high generalization, our model shares limitations common to generative frameworks and also has unique fail-14 ure modes related to its joint-generation task. 

Texture-Geometry Ambiguity: As a single-image model, GeoRelight can struggle with the ambiguity between a 3D object and a 2D texture. For example, a small object held by the subject (e.g., a flower) may be incorrectly interpreted as a 2D texture pattern. In such cases, the object is “baked” into the albedo map but is entirely absent from the surface normal and geometry (iNOD) outputs. This leads to a phys-ically implausible relit image where the object appears as a flat pattern rather than a 3D object that should cast its own shadows. 

Temporal Inconsistency: GeoRelight is a single-image framework. Generating a sequence of images (e.g., by rotat-ing the light source) requires multiple independent forward passes. Because the generative process is not determinis-tic, this can result in small inconsistencies between frames, leading to “temporal flickering” when viewed as a video. Enforcing temporal consistency for video relighting is a sig-nificant challenge and a clear direction for future work. Al-ternative sensing modalities such as event cameras, which naturally capture temporal changes with high temporal res-olution [38, 40], could also provide complementary signals for temporally-consistent reconstruction. 

Out-of-Distribution Subjects: Though our model is ro-bust, it can be challenged by subjects with extreme, out-of-distribution (OOD) poses, severe occlusions, or highly complex, non-Lambertian materials (e.g., metallic or spec-ular clothing) that are rare in our hybrid training data. Our disentangled outputs could also benefit downstream tasks such as physically plausible human-scene interaction esti-mation [44], where accurate geometry and lighting are es-sential for realistic contact and placement. 

## References 

[1] K. S. Arun, T. S. Huang, and S. D. Blostein. Least-squares fitting of two 3-d point sets. IEEE Transactions on Pat-tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , PAMI-9(5):698– 700, 1987. 6, 13 [2] Jonathan T Barron and Jitendra Malik. Shape, illumination, and reflectance from shading. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 37(8):1670–1687, 2014. 3[3] Harry Barrow, J Tenenbaum, A Hanson, and E Riseman. Re-covering intrinsic scene characteristics. Comput. vis. syst , 2 (3-26):2, 1978. 2 [4] Shrisha Bharadwaj, Haiwen Feng, Giorgio Becherini, Vic-toria Fernandez Abrevaya, and Michael J. Black. GenLit: Reformulating single image relighting as video generation. In SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Papers ’25 , New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. 2 [5] Chris Careaga and Yagiz Aksoy. Physically controllable re-lighting of photographs. In Proceedings of the Special Inter-est Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference, SIGGRAPH Conference Papers 2025, Vancou-ver, BC, Canada, August 10-14, 2025 , pages 105:1–105:10. ACM, 2025. 3 [6] Sumit Chaturvedi, Mengwei Ren, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Jingyuan Liu, Julie Dorsey, and Zhixin Shu. Synthlight: Por-trait relighting with diffusion model by learning to re-render synthetic faces. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 2, 12 [7] Hila Chefer, Uriel Singer, Amit Zohar, Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Yaniv Taigman, Lior Wolf, and Shelly Sheynin. VideoJAM: Joint appearance-motion representations for en-hanced motion generation in video models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. 3 [8] Elena Garces, Carlos Rodriguez-Pardo, Dan Casas, and Jorge Lopez-Moreno. A survey on intrinsic images: Delv-ing deep into lambert and beyond. International Journal of Computer Vision , 130(3):836–868, 2022. 2 [9] Kai He, Ruofan Liang, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Nandita Vijaykumar, Alexander Keller, Sanja Fidler, Igor Gilitschenski, Zan Gojcic, and Zian Wang. Unirelight: Learning joint decomposition and synthesis for video relight-ing, 2025. 2, 3, 4 [10] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2022. 10 [11] Zeren Jiang, Chuanxia Zheng, Iro Laina, Diane Larlus, and Andrea Vedaldi. Geo4d: Leveraging video generators for geometric 4d scene reconstruction, 2025. 3 [12] Haian Jin, Yuan Li, Fujun Luan, Yuanbo Xiangli, Sai Bi, Kai Zhang, Zexiang Xu, Jin Sun, and Noah Snavely. Neural gaffer: Relighting any object via diffusion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. 2, 4, 6, 12, 13 [13] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative models, 2022. 4 [14] Bingxin Ke, Anton Obukhov, Shengyu Huang, Nando Met-zger, Rodrigo Caye Daudt, and Konrad Schindler. Repurpos-ing diffusion-based image generators for monocular depth estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 3 [15] Bingxin Ke, Kevin Qu, Tianfu Wang, Nando Metzger, Shengyu Huang, Bo Li, Anton Obukhov, and Konrad Schindler. Marigold: Affordable adaptation of diffusion-based image generators for image analysis, 2025. 3 [16] Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su Zhaoen, Austin James, Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and Shunsuke Saito. Sapiens: Foundation for human vision mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12569 , 2024. 6, 12 [17] Hoon Kim, Minje Jang, Wonjun Yoon, Jisoo Lee, Donghyun Na, and Sanghyun Woo. Switchlight: Co-design of physics-driven architecture and pre-training framework for human portrait relighting, 2024. 2, 11, 12 [18] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017. 9 [19] LAION. Releasing re-laion-5b: transparent iteration on laion-5b with additional safety fixes. https://laion. ai/blog/relaion-5b/ , 2024. Accessed: 30 aug, 2024. 5, 11 

15 [20] Edwin H Land and John J McCann. Lightness and retinex theory. Journal of the Optical society of America , 61(1):1– 11, 1971. 2 [21] Shikai Li, Jianglin Fu, Kaiyuan Liu, Wentao Wang, Kwan-Yee Lin, and Wayne Wu. Cosmicman: A text-to-image foun-dation model for humans. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. 5, 11 [22] Ruofan Liang, Zan Gojcic, Huan Ling, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Zhi-Hao Lin, Jun Gao, Alexander Keller, Nan-dita Vijaykumar, Sanja Fidler, and Zian Wang. Diffusion-renderer: Neural inverse and forward rendering with video diffusion models. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13 [23] Yuanxun Lu, Jingyang Zhang, Tian Fang, Jean-Daniel Nah-mias, Yanghai Tsin, Long Quan, Xun Cao, Yao Yao, and Shi-wei Li. Matrix3d: Large photogrammetry model all-in-one. 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2025. 3 [24] Nadav Magar, Amir Hertz, Eric Tabellion, Yael Pritch, Alex Rav-Acha, Ariel Shamir, and Yedid Hoshen. Lightlab: Con-trolling light sources in images with diffusion models. 2025. 2[25] Julieta Martinez, Emily Kim, Javier Romero, Timur Bagaut-dinov, Shunsuke Saito, Shoou-I Yu, Stuart Anderson, Michael Zollhöfer, Te-Li Wang, Shaojie Bai, Chenghui Li, Shih-En Wei, Rohan Joshi, Wyatt Borsos, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Paul Theodosis, Alexander Greene, Anjani Josyula, Silvio Mano Maeta, Andrew I. Jewett, Simon Ven-shtain, Christopher Heilman, Yueh-Tung Chen, Sidi Fu, Mo-hamed Ezzeldin A. Elshaer, Tingfang Du, Longhua Wu, Shen-Chi Chen, Kai Kang, Michael Wu, Youssef Emad, Steven Longay, Ashley Brewer, Hitesh Shah, James Booth, Taylor Koska, Kayla Haidle, Matt Andromalos, Joanna Hsu, Thomas Dauer, Peter Selednik, Tim Godisart, Scott Ardis-son, Matthew Cipperly, Ben Humberston, Lon Farr, Bob Hansen, Peihong Guo, Dave Braun, Steven Krenn, He Wen, Lucas Evans, Natalia Fadeeva, Matthew Stewart, Gabriel Schwartz, Divam Gupta, Gyeongsik Moon, Kaiwen Guo, Yuan Dong, Yichen Xu, Takaaki Shiratori, Fabian Prada, Bernardo R. Pires, Bo Peng, Julia Buffalini, Autumn Trim-ble, Kevyn McPhail, Melissa Schoeller, and Yaser Sheikh. Codec Avatar Studio: Paired Human Captures for Complete, Driveable, and Generalizable Avatars. NeurIPS Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , 2024. 5, 10 [26] Yiqun Mei, Mingming He, Li Ma, Julien Philip, Wenqi Xian, David M George, Xueming Yu, Gabriel Dedic, Ahmet Lev-ent Ta¸ sel, Ning Yu, Vishal M Patel, and Paul Debevec. Lux post facto: Learning portrait performance relighting with conditional video diffusion and a hybrid dataset. Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 2, 3, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13 [27] NVIDIA, :, Niket Agarwal, Arslan Ali, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Balaji, Erik Barker, Tiffany Cai, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Yongxin Chen, Yin Cui, Yifan Ding, Daniel Dworakowski, Jiaojiao Fan, Michele Fenzi, Francesco Ferroni, Sanja Fidler, Dieter Fox, Songwei Ge, Yunhao Ge, Jinwei Gu, Siddharth Gururani, Ethan He, Jiahui Huang, Jacob Huffman, Pooya Jannaty, Jingyi Jin, Seung Wook Kim, Gergely Klár, Grace Lam, Shiyi Lan, Laura Leal-Taixe, Anqi Li, Zhaoshuo Li, Chen-Hsuan Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Huan Ling, Ming-Yu Liu, Xian Liu, Alice Luo, Qianli Ma, Hanzi Mao, Kaichun Mo, Arsalan Mousavian, Seungjun Nah, Sriharsha Niverty, David Page, Despoina Paschalidou, Zeeshan Patel, Lindsey Pavao, Morteza Ramezanali, Fitsum Reda, Xiaowei Ren, Vasanth Rao Naik Sabavat, Ed Schmerling, Stella Shi, Bartosz Ste-faniak, Shitao Tang, Lyne Tchapmi, Przemek Tredak, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Jibin Varghese, Hao Wang, Haoxiang Wang, Heng Wang, Ting-Chun Wang, Fangyin Wei, Xinyue Wei, Jay Zhangjie Wu, Jiashu Xu, Wei Yang, Lin Yen-Chen, Xi-aohui Zeng, Yu Zeng, Jing Zhang, Qinsheng Zhang, Yuxuan Zhang, Qingqing Zhao, and Artur Zolkowski. Cosmos world foundation model platform for physical ai, 2025. 9, 12, 14 [28] Rohit Pandey, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Chloe LeGendre, Christian Haene, Sofien Bouaziz, Christoph Rhemann, Paul Debevec, and Sean Fanello. Total relighting: Learning to relight portraits for background replacement. 2021. 2, 11, 12 [29] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09748 , 2022. 2, 9 [30] Erik Reinhard, Greg Ward, Sumanta Pattanaik, and Paul De-bevec. High Dynamic Range Imaging: Acquisition, Display, and Image-Based Lighting (The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics) . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2005. 4 [31] Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Ahmed Murtadha, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding, 2023. 4, 9, 14 [32] Timo Teufel, Pulkit Gera, Xilong Zhou, Umar Iqbal, Pramod Rao, Jan Kautz, Vladislav Golyanik, and Christian Theobalt. Humanolat: A large-scale dataset for full-body human re-lighting and novel-view synthesis. In International Confer-ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2025. 6, 7, 12 [33] Jianyuan Wang, Minghao Chen, Nikita Karaev, Andrea Vedaldi, Christian Rupprecht, and David Novotny. Vggt: Visual geometry grounded transformer. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2025. 3, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13 [34] Ruicheng Wang, Sicheng Xu, Cassie Dai, Jianfeng Xiang, Yu Deng, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Moge: Unlocking accurate monocular geometry estimation for open-domain images with optimal training supervision. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference ,pages 5261–5271, 2025. [35] Ruicheng Wang, Sicheng Xu, Yue Dong, Yu Deng, Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Guangzhong Sun, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Moge-2: Accurate monocular geometry with metric scale and sharp details, 2025. 6, 7, 8, 12, 13 [36] Shuzhe Wang, Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, Boris Chidlovskii, and Jerome Revaud. Dust3r: Geometric 3d vi-sion made easy. In CVPR , 2024. 3, 12 [37] Shaofei Wang, Tomas Simon, Igor Santesteban, Timur Bagautdinov, Junxuan Li, Vasu Agrawal, Fabian Prada, Shoou-I Yu, Pace Nalbone, Matt Gramlich, Roman Lubach-ersky, Chenglei Wu, Javier Romero, Jason Saragih, Michael 

16 Zollhoefer, Andreas Geiger, Siyu Tang, and Shunsuke Saito. Relightable full-body gaussian codec avatars. In Proceed-ings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers ,New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Ma-chinery. 5, 10 [38] Yuxuan Xue, Haolong Li, Stefan Leutenegger, and Joerg Stueckler. Event-based non-rigid reconstruction from con-tours. In 33rd British Machine Vision Conference 2022, BMVC 2022 , 2022. 15 [39] Yuxuan Xue, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Riccardo Marin, Niko-laos Sarafianos, Yuanlu Xu, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Tony Tung. Nsf: Neural surface fields for human modeling from monocular depth. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 15049–15060, 2023. 13 [40] Yuxuan Xue, Haolong Li, Stefan Leutenegger, and Jörg Stückler. Event-based non-rigid reconstruction of low-rank parametrized deformations from contours. Int. J. Comput. Vis. , 132(8):2943–2961, 2024. 15 [41] Yuxuan Xue, Xianghui Xie, Riccardo Marin, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Human-3diffusion: Realistic avatar creation via explicit 3d consistent diffusion models. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems 38 (NeurIPS) , 2024. 8, 14 [42] Yuxuan Xue, Xianghui Xie, Margaret Kostyrko, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Infinihuman: Infinite 3d human creation with precise control. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Pa-pers , 2025. 14 [43] Yuxuan Xue, Xianghui Xie, Riccardo Marin, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Gen-3diffusion: Realistic image-to-3d genera-tion via 2d & 3d diffusion synergy. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2025. 8, 14 [44] Pradyumna Yalandur Muralidhar, Yuxuan Xue, Xianghui Xie, Margaret Kostyrko, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Physic: Physically plausible 3d human-scene interaction and contact from a single image. SIGGRAPH Asia 2025 Conference Pa-pers , 2025. 15 [45] Chong Zeng, Yue Dong, Pieter Peers, Youkang Kong, Hongzhi Wu, and Xin Tong. Dilightnet: Fine-grained light-ing control for diffusion-based image generation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , 2024. 2, 6, 12, 13 [46] Zheng Zeng, Valentin Deschaintre, Iliyan Georgiev, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, Yiwei Hu, Fujun Luan, Ling-Qi Yan, and Miloš Hašan. Rgb ↔x: Image decomposition and synthe-sis using material- and lighting-aware diffusion models. In 

ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. 2, 6, 12 [47] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Scal-ing in-the-wild training for diffusion-based illumination har-monization and editing by imposing consistent light trans-port. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2025. 2, 6, 12, 13 [48] Shumin Zhu, Wai Keung Wong, and Xingxing Zou. Learning-based human relighting: A survey. ACM Comput-ing Surveys , 2025. 2 

17