Title: GLINT: Modeling Scene-Scale Transparency via Gaussian Radiance Transport

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26181v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:57:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# GLINT: Modeling Scene-Scale Transparency via Gaussian Radiance Transport 

# Youngju Na 1,2,∗ Jaeseong Yun 2 Soohyun Ryu 2 Hyunsu Kim 2 Sung-Eui Yoon 1 Suyong Yeon 21KAIST 2NAVER LABS 

# https://youngju-na.github.io/GLINT 4.43 

4.37 

3

Figure 1. Our framework GLINT performs decomposed Gaussian radiance transport to reconstruct transparent surfaces with physically consistent geometry and appearance. (Left) The first row shows a rendered image, normal map, and transparency map. The second row visualizes the radiance contributions of the interface, transmission, and reflection components. (Right) Reconstructed Mesh. 

# Abstract 

While 3D Gaussian splatting has emerged as a power-ful paradigm, it fundamentally fails to model transparency such as glass panels. The core challenge lies in decou-pling the intertwined radiance contributions from trans-parent interfaces and the transmitted geometry observed through the glass. We present GLINT, a framework that models scene-scale transparency through explicit decom-posed Gaussian representation. GLINT reconstructs the primary interface and models reflected and transmitted ra-diance separately, enabling consistent radiance transport. During optimization, GLINT bootstraps transparency local-ization from geometry-separation cues induced by the de-

> *Work done during an internship at NAVER LABS.

composition, together with geometry and material priors from a pre-trained video relighting model. Extensive ex-periments demonstrate consistent improvements over prior methods for reconstructing complex transparent scenes. 

# 1. Introduction 

Photorealistic 3D reconstruction with accurate geometry is a central goal in vision and graphics. 3D Gaussian Splat-ting (3DGS) [19] has recently advanced this goal with real-time rendering and high visual fidelity. The core challenge in modeling transparent surfaces with 3DGS arises from its monolithic α-blending formulation, which inherently con-flates geometry and appearance across multiple radiance paths. Consequently, 3DGS bakes these optical phenomena into entangled Gaussian primitives, achieving visual plau-

> arXiv:2603.26181v1 [cs.CV] 27 Mar 2026

sibility while compromising geometric accuracy and inter-pretability. The problem is especially pronounced in large-scale scenes containing thin transparent structures, such as architectural glass, display cases, or windows, as in Fig. 1. In these scenarios, a single pixel captures a superposition of radiance from reflected and transmitted components origi-nating from distinct physical locations [36]. To render pho-torealistic novel view images, the Gaussians associated with glass must have negligibly low opacity or be pruned dur-ing optimization to reveal background objects. Conversely, physically grounded glass geometry demands high opacity with sharp boundaries. This ambiguity forces standard α-blending into a compromise, often producing ghost-like re-flections or missing transparent geometry. Existing approaches often rely on object-centric assump-tions and segmentation masks [21, 24], or are restricted to primary first-surface reconstruction, struggling to recover transmissive radiance contributions. Such limitations pre-vent a physically faithful reconstruction, which is crucial for downstream applications including robotic manipula-tion, digital-twin construction, and scene understanding. In this paper, we present GLINT , a Gaussian Light INverse-rendering framework for scene-scale Transparency reconstruction. Specifically, we model a scene with a de-composed Gaussian representation that explicitly partitions primitives into interface, transmission, and reflection com-ponents, enabling a formulation for both transparent and opaque regions. Our hybrid Gaussian radiance transport unifies rasterization and ray tracing to reconstruct multi-path radiance in a physically grounded manner. In addi-tion, we incorporate geometric and material priors from a pre-trained video diffusion relighting model [26], which complements our decomposition and provides optimization stability. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our framework success-fully reconstructs complex transparent scenes, producing accurate geometry, reliable transparency maps, and an inter-pretable decomposition of radiance. Our key contributions are as follows: • We propose a decomposed Gaussian representation that enables modeling of both transparent and opaque regions through explicit separation of first-visible interface, trans-mission, and reflection components. • We introduce a hybrid transparency-aware rendering scheme that unifies rasterization and ray tracing under a physically grounded radiance formulation for consistent multi-path radiance transport. • We introduce 3D-FRONT-T, a first synthetic benchmark for scene-scale transparency that enables quantitative evaluation of both appearance and geometry. Using this dataset and the real-world DL3DV-10K [27] dataset, we achieve state-of-the-art reconstruction performance in both photometric and geometric evaluation. 

# 2. Related Work 

Our study lies at the intersection of neural scene representa-tions and physically based inverse rendering, which aims to reconstruct accurate geometry and appearance with scene-scale transparency. We review relevant research includ-ing: advances in 3DGS, radiance decomposition for non-Lambertian surfaces, and transparent scene reconstruction. 

2.1. Gaussian Splatting 

3DGS [19] represents scenes using explicit 3D Gaussian primitives, achieving real-time novel view synthesis with high visual fidelity. Since its introduction, numerous ex-tensions have sought to improve its geometric accuracy and photometric realism. Several works reduce reliance on strong SfM initialization [9, 20], introduce alias-free splat-ting [44], or enhance geometric fidelity [5, 6, 12, 15]. For instance, adapting Gaussians into planar-constrained struc-tures [5, 12] or surfels [6, 15] enables a more faithful repre-sentation of fine-grained surface details. Accurate surface modeling is crucial not only for geom-etry reconstruction but for capturing secondary lighting ef-fects, such as reflection and refraction, which are sensitive to surface geometry. However, existing approaches com-monly rely on spherical harmonics to approximate view-dependent radiance, which limits their ability to capture complex non-Lambertian effects in an interpretable manner. 

2.2. Radiance Decomposition in Gaussian Splatting 

To move beyond simple view-dependent appearance and model complex light–material interactions, several works decompose radiance into more interpretable components. One line of research integrates physically-based mate-rial properties directly into the Gaussian primitives. For instance, GaussianShader [17] and R3DG [10] incorporate BRDF shading functions for each Gaussian, enabling per-primitive separation into diffuse and specular components. A different strategy focuses on explicitly modeling the source of reflections rather than just the surface properties. DeferredGS [37] and 3DGS-DR [42] employ deferred ren-dering pipelines, which first buffer geometric properties and then compute view-dependent shading and reflections in a second pass. Taking this concept further, EnvGS [39] in-troduces a separate set of environment Gaussians to explic-itly model the surrounding scene, then uses a ray tracing pipeline to query this environment representation to render strong reflections. While these approaches greatly improve the realism and interpretability, their formulations remain restricted to opaque reflected light paths and provide limited capacity for modeling transmitted radiance. Consequently, they strug-gle with transparent surfaces that exhibit both reflection and transmission, a common case in real-world settings such as glass facades, display cases, and windows. 2.3. Transparent Scene Reconstruction 

Transparency poses a fundamental challenge for multi-view reconstruction because the observed radiance is a mixture of transmitted background and glass-reflected environment components, violating the single-surface visibility assump-tion in conventional methods [38]. For optically thin glass, light transport remains nearly linear with negligible refrac-tion [11], yet radiance contributions from multiple depths overlap within each pixel, resulting in perceptually complex observations. This contrasts with refractive transparency, where pronounced refraction at material interfaces produces explicit optical phenomena that require volumetric model-ing of the refractive medium [2, 25, 33]. Under the Gaussian splatting paradigm, Transpar-entGS [16] introduces transparent Gaussian primitives and light-field probes to efficiently handle object-centered re-fraction, while TSGS [24] targets optically thin trans-parency using first-surface rasterization for accurate geome-try reconstruction. Despite these advances, both approaches remain object-centric and require segmentation or assume a single surface, making them difficult to scale to complex multi-depth transparency in real-world scenes. In this paper, we address these limitations by modeling scene-scale optically thin transparency through a decom-posed Gaussian representation and a physically consistent radiance transport formulation that jointly reconstructs ge-ometry and appearance without requiring masks. 

# 3. Method 

3.1. Preliminaries: 2D Gaussian Rendering 

Our method builds upon Gaussian splatting, specifically adopting 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS) [15], which rep-resents scenes using anisotropic 2D Gaussians defined on local tangent planes. This resolves geometric inaccuracies in 3DGS [19], which relies on volumetric 3D primitives. While 3DGS defines primitives with a 3D covariance matrix Σ ∈ R3×3, 2DGS constrains each Gaussian’s co-variance to lie on a local tangent plane. Each 2D Gaussian primitive Gi is parameterized by its 3D mean μi ∈ R3, a 2D covariance Σ2Di defined on the tangent plane [15], Spher-ical Harmonics (SH) coefficients ci for view-dependent color, and an opacity oi.The scene is rendered using standard alpha-compositing. Unlike 3DGS, which evaluates volumetric density through a projected 2D footprint, 2DGS performs perspective-correct splatting. For each pixel p, the contribution of a primi-tive is computed by explicitly intersecting the camera ray with the primitive’s tangent plane, yielding a local coordi-nate ui(p) = ( u, v ). The 2D Gaussian is evaluated as: 

Gi(ui) = exp − 12 (u2 + v2) . (1) The opacity αi(p) at which primitive i contributes to pixel 

p is given by: 

αi(p) = oi · Gi(ui(p)) . (2) With these opacities, the contribution of each primitive along the viewing ray is accumulated using front-to-back compositing. We first define the transmittance Ti, which measures how much light from primitive i remains unoc-cluded by all closer primitives j < i :

Ti = Y

> j<i

(1 − αj (p)) . (3) Finally, the pixel radiance is obtained by summing the col-ors of all primitives intersecting the ray: 

L(o, d) = X

> i∈S (r)

Ti αi(p) ci(d). (4) This perspective-correct formulation preserves the correct geometric ordering of splats and enables stable, view-consistent rendering. 

Rendering techniques. In practice, the per-pixel contri-bution αi(p) (Eq. (2)) can be computed in two ways. 

Rasterization. The 2DGS [15] framework employs a tile-based rasterizer that identifies affected pixels, computes the perspective-correct ray–splat intersection ui(p), eval-uates the Gaussian (Eq. (1)), and composites results via Eq. (4). This intersection-based formulation maintains ge-ometric consistency and avoids projection artifacts inherent to the affine projection approximation in [19]. 

Ray Tracing. Alternatively, Gaussian ray tracing [28, 39] is employed for secondary effects, as rasterization is im-practical for querying unique paths per pixel. Following EnvGS [39], we represent each 2D Gaussian as a pair of triangles to enable hardware-accelerated BVH traversal, al-lowing efficient ray-primitive intersection tests. 

3.2. Decomposed Gaussian Representation 

Modeling transparency within standard Gaussian volume rendering is fundamentally limited by its monolithic α-blending, which entangles geometry and appearance in a single compositing stream. This creates an inherent 

transparency-depth dilemma [24], where appearance opti-mization conflicts with geometric accuracy. When trans-parent surfaces contribute minimal radiance, optimization drives their opacity toward zero, causing them to vanish under adaptive pruning [19]. Conversely, increasing opac-ity treats them as opaque occluders, blocking transmitted backgrounds and collapsing geometry into a single entan-gled field. To resolve this, we introduce a decomposed Gaussian representation that explicitly partitions the scene’s Gaussian primitives into three functional sets based on their optical 𝐿 trans 

𝐿 refl 

𝐿 intr 

> Diffusion
> Renderer
> Input video
> Reflection
> Interface Gaussian
> Secondary Gaussian
> Transmission
> Interface

6.53 

0

.

3

6   

> ොaƸ𝑧 ොn

# ⊕

ℒphoto 

> G-buffers
> 𝒜 (𝑡 𝑖 )
> 𝒜 (𝑑 𝑖 )
> 𝒜 (𝑛 𝑖 )
> 𝒢 intr
> 𝒢 trans
> 𝒢 refl

ℒgeo      

> Position 𝜇 𝑖
> Opaci ty 𝑜 𝑖
> normal 𝑛 𝑖
> Transparency 𝑡 𝑖
> Specularity 𝑠 𝑖

𝐿 o

𝐿 GT   

> Color 𝑐 𝑖
> Covariance Σ𝑖
> 2𝐷

Figure 2. Pipeline Overview. The interface component Gintr captures primary first-surface, while secondary components Gtrans and Grefl 

separately model transmission and reflection. The output color Lo is obtained through hybrid rendering under transparency-aware radiance transport and supervised by photometric loss Lphoto . DiffusionRenderer [26] provides priors that regularize the G-buffers via Lgeo .

roles: Interface (Gintr ), Transmission (Gtrans ), and Reflection 

(Grefl ). The interface component Gintr captures the primary visible surface encountered by camera rays, encompassing both opaque and transparent material boundaries. It serves as the geometric interface, encoding per-point geometry and material attributes that govern how radiance is routed through subsequent components. The transmission com-ponent Gtrans models background geometry visible through transparent surfaces, capturing transmitted radiance paths. Finally, the reflection component Grefl encodes environment radiance reflected at both opaque and transparent interfaces. 

Hybrid rendering pipeline. With this decomposed repre-sentation, we employ a hybrid rendering approach that uses rasterization for primary surface visibility and ray tracing for secondary transmission and reflection paths. The in-terface component Gintr is rasterized to produce a G-buffer 

B = {z, n, t, s } encoding depth, normal, transparency, and specularity, where each entry is obtained by applying the compositing operator A(·) with weights Ai = Tiαi

defined in Eq. 4. This G-buffer then guides ray-traced queries into Gtrans and Grefl for secondary transmission and reflection, where the transparency t ∈ [0 , 1] gates the opaque–transparent split and the specularity s ∈ [0 , 1] con-trols the diffuse–specular balance. The overall rendering pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

3.3. Transparency-Aware Radiance Transport 

In this section, we formulate radiance transport through our decomposed Gaussian representation, where outgoing ra-diance is computed by querying and combining the radi-ance from interface, transmission, and reflection compo-nents based on local surface properties. Unlike prior radi-ance decomposition approaches [37, 39, 42, 46] which pri-marily address opaque reflection, our formulation adopts a BSDF-inspired decomposition [1] that splits outgoing ra-diance into reflection and transmission paths based on the surface properties encoded in the G-buffer. The outgoing radiance, which we denote as Lo, is ex-pressed as a transparency-gated interpolation between two transport branches: 

Lo = (1 − t) Lopaque + t L transparent , (5) where transparency t obtained from the G-buffer B deter-mines whether radiance transport follows opaque or trans-parent paths. 

Opaque branch ( Lopaque ). For opaque surfaces, the out-going radiance consists of the interface base color com-bined with reflected environment radiance, weighted by sur-face specularity. The transport is modeled as a physically-inspired blend between diffuse and specular components. The Fresnel reflectance is approximated using the Schlick formulation [32] with the outgoing direction ωo = −d:

F (ωo) = F0 + (1 − F0)(1 − max(0 , ω o ·n)) 5, (6) where F0 denotes the normal-incidence reflectance. Alearnable per-pixel specularity s modulates the overall spec-ular weight, yielding a Fresnel-weighted blending factor: 

ks = s + (1 − s)F (ωo), (7) and the outgoing opaque radiance is given by: 

Lopaque = (1 − ks) Lintr + ks Lrefl , (8) where Lintr is the base color rasterized from the interface set Gintr , and Lrefl (x, ω r ) = Trace( Grefl , x, ω r ) denotes ra-diance traced from the reflection component Grefl along the Figure 3. Depth decomposition. (Left) Rendered image, (Middle) interface depth, and (Right) transmission depth. 

analytic reflection direction: 

ωr = 2( n·ωo) n − ωo. (9) This approximates the behavior of a diffuse–specular BRDF while omitting roughness and masking–shadowing terms for simplicity. 

Transparent branch ( Ltransparent ). For transparent sur-faces, the outgoing radiance consists of transmitted radiance from the background and reflected radiance from the envi-ronment. We adopt a Fresnel-based decomposition inspired by the dielectric BSDF to balance these two contributions. The outgoing transparent radiance is formulated as: 

Ltransparent = (1 − ks) Ltrans + ks Lrefl , (10) where ks is derived from Eq. 7, modulating the transmit-ted and reflected contributions. Under the optically thin as-sumption ( ωt ≈ ωo), refraction-induced bending is negligi-ble, allowing the transmitted radiance to be approximated by Ltrans = Trace( Gtrans , x, ω t).By separating transmission and reflection into indepen-dently optimizable Gaussian components, this formula-tion mitigates the transparency–depth trade-off inherent in monolithic α-blending, which often leads to degraded vi-sual fidelity or geometric accuracy. 

3.4. Optimization 

Our primary training objective minimizes the photometric error between the rendered outgoing radiance Lo (Eq. 5) and the ground-truth image LGT :

Lphoto = λ1L1 + λssim LSSIM + λlpips LLPIPS , (11) where L1 measures pixel-wise reconstruction error, 

LSSIM [35] enforces structural similarity, and LLPIPS [45] captures perceptual fidelity. While Lphoto provides the main supervision signal, trans-parent scenes remain ill-posed because each pixel mixes re-flected and transmitted radiance from different depths, mak-ing photometric cues alone insufficient. Prior works use dense monocular predictors [31, 40, 41] as auxiliary geo-metric regularizers [23, 24, 39]. Instead, we utilize the en-coder of a pre-trained video relighting model [26] to obtain   

> Figure 4. Obtained transparency maps. GT images (first row) and learned transparency maps (second row).

frame-consistent geometric and material priors that regular-ize the interface components. 

Geometric regularization. Specifically, we use the pre-dicted depth ˆz and normal ˆn from the encoder [26] to reg-ularize the interface component’s geometric attributes in G-buffer: 

Lgeo = λdLdepth (z, ˆz) + λnLnormal (n, ˆn), (12) where Ldepth follows a scale-invariant formulation [43], and 

Lnormal = 1 − cos( n, ˆn) penalizes angular deviation [24]. These priors stabilize the interface geometry, providing a robust scaffold for the secondary transmission and reflec-tion components. 

Bootstrapping transparency. A key advantage of our de-composed representation is its ability to bootstrap trans-parency localization without manual segmentation masks. While segmentation modules [31] can identify transparent objects ( i.e ., glass, bottle) in isolation, they often fail or re-turn noisy results for scene-scale transparency due to am-biguous boundaries and overlapping transmitted radiance. Instead, our decomposed representation bootstraps trans-parency localization, leveraging signals that emerge dur-ing optimization. The principal cue is the inter-component depth difference ∆z = |zintr − ztrans |, where zintr and ztrans 

denote the interface and transmitted depths respectively. This signal, arising where multiple depth layers coexist, re-veals the spatial separation between the interface and trans-mitted geometry as in Fig. 3. As a complementary sig-nal, we use the diffuse-albedo map ˆa obtained from [26], where lower values help identify specular-dominant trans-port rather than diffuse transport. We construct a binary transparency mask by thresholding these bootstrapped cues: 

Mtrans = 1 (∆ z > τ d) ∧ (ˆ a < γ a), (13) which supervises the predicted transparency buffer t via: 

Ltrans = λt∥Mtrans − t∥1. (14) As shown in Fig. 4, this bootstrapped transparency local-ization effectively identifies glass regions across diverse scenes, exhibiting inherent transparency disentanglement due to our explicit decomposed representation. Table 1. Quantitative evaluation of geometry on the synthetic 3D-FRONT-T dataset. We report normal metrics (MAE, and accuracy thresholds of 11 .25 ◦, 22 .5◦) and depth metrics (AbsRel, RMSE, δ < 1.25 ), along with mesh metrics (CD, F1-score). 

Method Normal Depth Mesh MAE ↓ 11 .25 ◦ ↑ 22 .5◦ ↑ AbsRel ↓ RMSE ↓ δ < 1.25 ↑ CD ↓ F1 ↑

2DGS [15] 25.97 52.19 64.55 0.20 0.24 76.71 0.85 0.688 PGSR [5] 25.39 56.83 65.58 0.22 0.25 76.68 0.52 0.807 Ref-GS [46] 41.55 18.61 36.79 0.28 0.36 57.52 1.29 0.408 EnvGS [39] 14.37 68.22 80.23 0.13 0.16 86.10 0.87 0.640 TSGS [24] 9.89 86.29 92.24 0.08 0.12 95.56 0.52 0.798 

GLINT (Ours) 7.96 86.37 92.28 0.04 0.07 98.32 0.34 0.836 

GT PGSR [5] EnvGS [39] TSGS [24] Ours   

> Figure 5. Qualitative comparison on synthetic scenes. Each column shows results from GT, PGSR [5], EnvGS [39], TSGS [24], and Ours. For each scene, rows correspond to RGB (top) and depth maps (bottom).

GT mesh Ours EnvGS [39] 

RGB TSGS [24] PGSR [5]   

> Figure 6. Mesh visualization comparison. The meshes are ob-tained from TSDF fusion following baselines.

# 4. Experimental Results 

4.1. Implementation Details 

We implement GLINT in PyTorch, integrating the 2DGS rasterizer [15] for primary interface rendering and a modi-fied OptiX [30]-based ray tracer adapted from EnvGS [39] for secondary transmission and reflection queries. All ex-periments are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. Following [19], we adopt adaptive densification and pruning, augmented with edge-aware normal smoothing and a normal consistency constraint between the rendered normal map and the depth-map gradients, as used in prior works [15, 24, 39]. For transparency bootstrapping, we set 

τd = 0 .01 and γa = 0 .05 across all experiments. Addi-tional implementation details are provided in the Appendix. 

4.2. Datasets 

We evaluate GLINT on both real-world and synthetic benchmarks to evaluate its performance in reconstructing geometry and appearance in scene-scale transparency. 

Real-world. We leverage DL3DV-10K [27], a large-scale dataset containing diverse indoor and outdoor scenes with complex material properties, including strong reflection and GT PGSR [5] EnvGS [39] TSGS [24] Ours   

> Figure 7. Qualitative comparison on DL3DV-10K dataset. Each column shows results from GT, PGSR [5], EnvGS [39], TSGS [24], and Ours. For each scene, rows correspond to RGB (top) and normal (bottom) maps.

transmission effects. We select a subset of 8 scenes fea-turing prominent transparent surfaces such as glass parti-tions, display cases, and windows. Since DL3DV-10K lacks ground-truth geometry annotations, the evaluation focuses on photometric quality and qualitative evaluation on geo-metric reconstruction. 

Synthetic. To enable rigorous quantitative evaluation on transparent geometry, we introduce 3D-FRONT-T, a new synthetic benchmark specifically designed for scene-scale transparency. 3D-FRONT-T extends 3D-FRONT [8] by randomly placing thin transparent elements—such as glass panels and display cases—that enclose or interact with opaque objects, rendered with Blender [13]. The dataset contains 5 scenes with ground-truth depth and normal maps. Further details are provided in the Appendix. 

4.3. Baselines and Metrics 

Baselines. We compare against representative Gaussian splatting methods that enhance geometric fidelity or model complex non-Lambertian effects. Our baselines include planar-constrained variants (2DGS [15], PGSR [5]) and ap-proaches specialized for strong specular reflection (Ref-GS [46], EnvGS [39]). We further include TSGS [24], which specifically targets the surface reconstruction of transparent surfaces. We follow the official implementation to reproduce their results. Detailed descriptions of all base-lines are provided in the Appendix. 

Evaluation metrics. For rendering quality, we report PSNR, SSIM [35], and LPIPS [45]. For geometry recon-struction, we follow Metric3Dv2 [14] to evaluate depth us-ing absolute relative error (AbsRel), root mean squared er-ror (RMSE), and threshold accuracies δ < 1.25 . For nor-mals, we report the mean angular error (MAE) and angular accuracies under 11 .25 ◦, and 22 .5◦, representing the per-centage of pixels whose estimated normals deviate from the ground truth by less than the specified angle. For mesh eval-uation, we report Chamfer Distance (CD) and F1 score to assess surface reconstruction quality. The original metric for CD is in meters; we report CD in decimeters for read-ability. Table 2. Photometric evaluation on real and synthetic datasets. 

GLINT achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality, quantitatively outperforming all baseline methods on both benchmarks.                                            

> Method DL3DV-10K [27] 3D-FRONT-T PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
> 2DGS [15] 29.18 0.91 0.13 32.26 0.94 0.08 PGSR [5] 29.26 0.92 0.11 31.96 0.95 0.07 Ref-GS [46] 29.11 0.92 0.12 32.30 0.94 0.09 EnvGS [39] 29.65 0.91 0.12 33.71 0.94 0.07 TSGS [24] 25.94 0.85 0.19 28.80 0.87 0.14
> GLINT (Ours) 30.21 0.92 0.11 34.50 0.96 0.05

4.4. Baseline Comparisons 

Quantitative evaluation. As shown in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2, GLINT achieves state-of-the-art performance on both real-world (DL3DV-10K [27]) and synthetic (3D-FRONT-T) benchmarks. While TSGS [24] attains reasonable geomet-ric accuracy, its overall rendering quality remains low. In contrast, GLINT delivers both the highest photometric qual-ity (Tab. 2) and the lowest geometric errors (Tab. 1), con-sistently outperforming all baselines. These results sup-port our core hypothesis that explicitly decomposing radi-ance into interface, transmission, and reflection components effectively resolves the geometric ambiguities inherent to transparent scenes. 

Qualitative evaluation. Figs. 5 and 7 present qualitative comparisons on synthetic and real-world datasets, demon-strating the superior capability of our approach in recon-structing scene-scale transparency. Baseline methods [5, 24, 39] exhibit missing or noisy geometry on glass regions, with corresponding normal and depth maps revealing ei-ther incomplete glass surfaces or noisy floating artifacts. While TSGS [24] partially alleviates this issue through first-surface transparency modeling with data-driven pri-ors [31, 41], it still fails to recover transmitted radiance, resulting in blurred rendering of objects observed through glass. In contrast, GLINT successfully reconstructs well-defined transparent surfaces while simultaneously preserv-ing accurate transmitted appearance and reflection details. We further visualize reconstructed meshes obtained via TSDF fusion from the rendered depth maps, as shown in Fig. 6. Compared to baseline methods, GLINT produces more coherent glass interfaces and reduces floating artifacts around transparent structures. 

4.5. Ablation Studies 

We systematically evaluate each component’s contribution in Tab. 3. Ablating the transmission component ( Gtrans )causes the most significant performance drop, as back-ground content incorrectly blends with the interface Gaus-sians, creating geometric ambiguities that degrade both rendering quality and depth accuracy. Removing the re-

(a) Ours (b) w/o Ldepth 

(c) w/o Lnormal (d) w/o Lgeo 

Figure 8. Qualitative Ablation study of G-buffer guidance. 

Table 3. Ablation studies on our method. We report PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, Normal MAE, and Depth AbsRel. Method PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ MAE ↓ AbsRel ↓

w/o Gtrans 32.26 0.93 0.085 8.11 0.038 

w/o Grefl 32.70 0.94 0.067 8.78 0.038 

w/o Ltrans 33.57 0.94 0.066 8.07 0.037 

w/o Lnormal 33.92 0.95 0.060 12.21 0.043 

w/o Ldepth 34.05 0.95 0.058 8.54 0.061 

w/o Lgeo 33.62 0.95 0.060 24.69 0.126 Full model 34.50 0.96 0.048 7.96 0.035 

flection component ( Grefl ) moderately reduces rendering fi-delity, particularly in specular regions, though geometric metrics remain relatively stable. The transparency boot-strapping loss ( Ltrans ) serves as a stabilizing regularizer that guides the learning of transparency, yielding more consis-tent rendering and geometry. The geometric regularization losses, Lnormal and Ldepth , respectively enhance surface ori-entation and depth accuracy. As shown in Fig. 8, our G-buffer guidance losses effectively regularize the interface geometry. Additional qualitative ablation results are pro-vided in the Appendix. 

# 5. Conclusion and Discussion 

In this study, we introduced GLINT, the first framework to reconstruct scene-scale transparency through an explicit de-composition of interface, transmission, and reflection com-ponents. This formulation enables coherent geometry and appearance modeling, effectively disentangling transparent regions. Extensive experiments show that GLINT achieves state-of-the-art performance across both appearance and ge-ometry metrics, enabling faithful reconstruction of complex transparent structures. 

Limitations. While our rendering pipeline focuses on first-order radiance interactions, extending it to handle multi-bounce phenomena including nested transparency remains an important direction for future work. 6. Acknowledgements 

We sincerely appreciate the reviewers for their thoughtful comments. We also thank Kyu Beom Han and Taeyeon Kim for their careful proofreading. This work was sup-ported in part by the Institute of Information & Commu-nications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2025-25443318, Physically-grounded Intelligence: A Dual Com-petency Approach to Embodied AGI through Constructing and Reasoning in the Real World), in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2023-00208506), and in part by the Korea Planning & Evaluation Institute of In-dustrial Technology (KEIT) and the Ministry of Trade, In-dustry & Resources (MOTIR) of the Republic of Korea (No. RS-2024-00417108). 

# References 

[1] Frederick O Bartell, Eustace L Dereniak, and William L Wolfe. The theory and measurement of bidirectional re-flectance distribution function (brdf) and bidirectional trans-mittance distribution function (btdf). In Radiation scattering in optical systems , pages 154–160. SPIE, 1981. 4 [2] Mojtaba Bemana, Karol Myszkowski, Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Tobias Ritschel. Eikonal fields for refractive novel-view synthesis. In ACM SIGGRAPH , pages 1–9, 2022. 3 [3] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127 , 2023. 5 [4] Aleksei Bochkovskii, Ama¨ el Delaunoy, Hugo Germain, Marcel Santos, Yichao Zhou, Stephan R. Richter, and Vladlen Koltun. Depth pro: Sharp monocular metric depth in less than a second. In ICLR , 2025. 5 [5] Danpeng Chen, Hai Li, Weicai Ye, Yifan Wang, Weijian Xie, Shangjin Zhai, Nan Wang, Haomin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Guofeng Zhang. Pgsr: Planar-based gaussian splatting for efficient and high-fidelity surface reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06521 , 2024. 2, 6, 7, 8 [6] Pinxuan Dai, Jiamin Xu, Wenxiang Xie, Xinguo Liu, Huamin Wang, and Weiwei Xu. High-quality surface recon-struction using gaussian surfels. In ACM SIGGRAPH , pages 1–11, 2024. 2 [7] Maximilian Denninger, Dominik Winkelbauer, Martin Sun-dermeyer, Wout Boerdijk, Markus Knauer, Klaus H. Strobl, Matthias Humt, and Rudolph Triebel. Blenderproc2: Aprocedural pipeline for photorealistic rendering. Journal of Open Source Software , 8(82):4901, 2023. 2 [8] Huan Fu, Bowen Cai, Lin Gao, Ling-Xiao Zhang, Jiaming Wang, Cao Li, Qixun Zeng, Chengyue Sun, Rongfei Jia, Bin-qiang Zhao, et al. 3d-front: 3d furnished rooms with layouts and semantics. In ICCV , pages 10933–10942, 2021. 7, 1 [9] Yang Fu, Sifei Liu, Amey Kulkarni, Jan Kautz, Alexei A Efros, and Xiaolong Wang. Colmap-free 3d gaussian splat-ting. In CVPR , pages 20796–20805, 2024. 2 [10] Jian Gao, Chun Gu, Youtian Lin, Hao Zhu, Xun Cao, Li Zhang, and Yao Yao. Relightable 3d gaussian: Real-time point cloud relighting with brdf decomposition and ray trac-ing. arXiv:2311.16043 , 2023. 2 [11] Jinwei Gu, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Peter N Belhumeur, and Shree K Nayar. Dirty glass: Rendering contamination on transparent surfaces. Rendering Techniques , 159:170, 2007. 3[12] Antoine Gu´ edon and Vincent Lepetit. Sugar: Surface-aligned gaussian splatting for efficient 3d mesh reconstruc-tion and high-quality mesh rendering. In CVPR , 2024. 2 [13] Roland Hess. Blender Foundations: The Essential Guide to Learning Blender 2.6 . Focal Press, 2010. 7, 1 [14] Mu Hu, Wei Yin, Chi Zhang, Zhipeng Cai, Xiaoxiao Long, Hao Chen, Kaixuan Wang, Gang Yu, Chunhua Shen, and Shaojie Shen. Metric3d v2: A versatile monocular geomet-ric foundation model for zero-shot metric depth and surface normal estimation. PAMI , 2024. 7, 5 [15] Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger, and Shenghua Gao. 2d gaussian splatting for geometrically accu-rate radiance fields. In ACM SIGGRAPH , pages 1–11, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 7, 8 [16] Letian Huang, Dongwei Ye, Jialin Dan, Chengzhi Tao, Hui-wen Liu, Kun Zhou, Bo Ren, Yuanqi Li, Yanwen Guo, and Jie Guo. Transparentgs: Fast inverse rendering of transparent objects with gaussians. ACM TOG , 44(4):1–17, 2025. 3 [17] Yingwenqi Jiang, Jiadong Tu, Yuan Liu, Xifeng Gao, Xiaox-iao Long, Wenping Wang, and Yuexin Ma. Gaussianshader: 3d gaussian splatting with shading functions for reflective surfaces. In CVPR , pages 5322–5332, 2024. 2 [18] Bingxin Ke, Anton Obukhov, Shengyu Huang, Nando Met-zger, Rodrigo Caye Daudt, and Konrad Schindler. Repurpos-ing diffusion-based image generators for monocular depth estimation. In CVPR , 2024. 5 [19] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨ uhler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM TOG , 42(4):139–1, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 6 [20] Shakiba Kheradmand, Daniel Rebain, Gopal Sharma, Wei-wei Sun, Yang-Che Tseng, Hossam Isack, Abhishek Kar, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Kwang Moo Yi. 3d gaussian splat-ting as markov chain monte carlo. NeurIPS , 37:80965– 80986, 2024. 2 [21] Jeongyun Kim, Jeongho Noh, Dong-Guw Lee, and Ayoung Kim. Transplat: Surface embedding-guided 3d gaussian splatting for transparent object manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.07840 , 2025. 2 [22] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-head, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment any-thing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international confer-ence on computer vision , pages 4015–4026, 2023. 5 [23] Jiahe Li, Jiawei Zhang, Xiao Bai, Jin Zheng, Xin Ning, Jun Zhou, and Lin Gu. Dngaussian: Optimizing sparse-view 3d gaussian radiance fields with global-local depth normaliza-tion. In CVPR , pages 20775–20785, 2024. 5 [24] Mingwei Li, Pu Pang, Hehe Fan, Hua Huang, and Yi Yang. Tsgs: Improving gaussian splatting for transparent surface reconstruction via normal and de-lighting priors. In Proceed-ings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multime-dia , pages 7220–7229, 2025. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 [25] Zhengqin Li, Yu-Ying Yeh, and Manmohan Chandraker. Through the looking glass: Neural 3d reconstruction of transparent shapes. In CVPR , pages 1262–1271, 2020. 3 [26] Ruofan Liang, Zan Gojcic, Huan Ling, Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Chih-Hao Lin, Jun Gao, Alexander Keller, Nan-dita Vijaykumar, Sanja Fidler, et al. Diffusion renderer: Neu-ral inverse and forward rendering with video diffusion mod-els. In CVPR , pages 26069–26080, 2025. 2, 4, 5, 3, 6 [27] Lu Ling, Yichen Sheng, Zhi Tu, Wentian Zhao, Cheng Xin, Kun Wan, Lantao Yu, Qianyu Guo, Zixun Yu, Yawen Lu, et al. Dl3dv-10k: A large-scale scene dataset for deep learning-based 3d vision. In CVPR , pages 22160–22169, 2024. 2, 6, 8, 1 [28] Nicolas Moenne-Loccoz, Ashkan Mirzaei, Or Perel, Ric-cardo de Lutio, Janick Martinez Esturo, Gavriel State, Sanja Fidler, Nicholas Sharp, and Zan Gojcic. 3d gaussian ray trac-ing: Fast tracing of particle scenes. ACM TOG , 43(6):1–19, 2024. 3 [29] Yinyu Nie, Angela Dai, Xiaoguang Han, and Matthias Nießner. Learning 3d scene priors with 2d supervision. In 

CVPR , pages 792–802, 2023. 1 [30] Steven G Parker, James Bigler, Andreas Dietrich, Heiko Friedrich, Jared Hoberock, David Luebke, David McAllis-ter, Morgan McGuire, Keith Morley, Austin Robison, et al. Optix: a general purpose ray tracing engine. ACM TOG , 29 (4):1–13, 2010. 6 [31] Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang, Yukang Chen, Feng Yan, et al. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159 ,2024. 5, 8, 2, 7 [32] Christophe Schlick. An inexpensive brdf model for physically-based rendering. In Computer Graphics Forum ,pages 233–246. Wiley Online Library, 1994. 4 [33] Jia-Mu Sun, Tong Wu, Ling-Qi Yan, and Lin Gao. Nu-nerf: neural reconstruction of nested transparent objects with uncontrolled capture environment. ACM TOG , 43(6):1–14, 2024. 3 [34] Jinguang Tong, Xuesong Li, Fahira Afzal Maken, Sundaram Muthu, Lars Petersson, Chuong Nguyen, and Hongdong Li. Gs-2dgs: Geometrically supervised 2dgs for reflective object reconstruction. In CVPR , pages 21547–21557, 2025. 5 [35] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE TIP , 13(4):600–612, 2004. 5, 7[36] Patrick Wieschollek, Orazio Gallo, Jinwei Gu, and Jan Kautz. Separating reflection and transmission images in the wild. In ECCV , pages 89–104, 2018. 2 [37] Tong Wu, Jia-Mu Sun, Yu-Kun Lai, Yuewen Ma, Leif Kobbelt, and Lin Gao. Deferredgs: Decoupled and editable gaussian splatting with deferred shading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09412 , 2024. 2, 4 [38] Tianhao Wu, Hanxue Liang, Fangcheng Zhong, Gernot Riegler, Shimon Vainer, Jiankang Deng, and Cengiz Oztireli. 

αsurf: Implicit surface reconstruction for semi-transparent and thin objects with decoupled geometry and opacity. In 

3DV , pages 44–63. IEEE, 2025. 3 [39] Tao Xie, Xi Chen, Zhen Xu, Yiman Xie, Yudong Jin, Yu-jun Shen, Sida Peng, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. En-vgs: Modeling view-dependent appearance with environ-ment gaussian. In CVPR , pages 5742–5751, 2025. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 [40] Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Zhen Zhao, Xiao-gang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth any-thing v2. arXiv:2406.09414 , 2024. 5 [41] Chongjie Ye, Lingteng Qiu, Xiaodong Gu, Qi Zuo, Yushuang Wu, Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, Yuliang Xiu, and Xiaoguang Han. Stablenormal: Reducing diffusion variance for stable and sharp normal. ACM TOG , 2024. 5, 8, 2 [42] Keyang Ye, Qiming Hou, and Kun Zhou. 3d gaussian splat-ting with deferred reflection. In ACM SIGGRAPH , pages 1–10, 2024. 2, 4 [43] Zehao Yu, Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Torsten Sat-tler, and Andreas Geiger. Monosdf: Exploring monocu-lar geometric cues for neural implicit surface reconstruction. 

NeurIPS , 35:25018–25032, 2022. 5, 2, 3 [44] Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Binbin Huang, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. Mip-splatting: Alias-free 3d gaussian splat-ting. In CVPR , pages 19447–19456, 2024. 2 [45] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR , pages 586–595, 2018. 5, 7 [46] Youjia Zhang, Anpei Chen, Yumin Wan, Zikai Song, Junqing Yu, Yawei Luo, and Wei Yang. Ref-gs: Directional factoriza-tion for 2d gaussian splatting. In CVPR , pages 26483–26492, 2025. 4, 6, 7, 8, 2 GLINT: Modeling Scene-Scale Transparency via Gaussian Radiance Transport 

# Supplementary Material 

This supplementary material provides additional details on (i) the proposed synthetic 3D-Front-T dataset (Sec. A), (ii) the baseline methods used in our experiments (Sec. B), and (iii) implementation details (Sec. C). In addition, we in-clude qualitative results on ablation studies (Sec. D), com-parative analysis with baselines (Sec. E), discussion on foundation models (Sec. F), detailed discussion on limita-tions and future work (Sec. G), and additional qualitative results on both real and synthetic datasets (Sec. H). 

# A. 3D-FRONT-T Dataset 

To enable rigorous quantitative evaluation of scene-scale transparency reconstruction, we introduce 3D-FRONT-T, a new synthetic benchmark for scene-scale transparency re-construction. We construct our dataset built upon the 3D-FRONT (3D Furnished rooms with layouts and seman-tics) dataset [8]. While existing real-world datasets contain transparent scenes [27], they lack ground-truth geometry annotations for quantitative evaluation on geometry recon-struction. Our 3D-FRONT-T addresses this by providing depth and normal ground truth alongside RGB renderings of transparent scenes. 

A.1. Dataset Construction 

We collect 5 indoor scenes from the 3D-FRONT [8] datasets with diverse configurations. For each scene, we first iden-tify the largest room by floor area and retain only the objects within that room, including walls, ceilings, doors, windows, and furniture placed on the floor. Then, we texture the floor, wall and ceiling in the scene with the diverse random mate-rials following [29]. On top of this setup, we create and put a glass display container with a black metal frame, enclosing opaque ob-jects. The container consists of six thin glass panels with a supporting frame structure. The container size is randomly determined to create different sizes of transparency regions. To achieve realistic placement, we utilize Blender’s physics-based simulation [13] to settle objects into physi-cally plausible configurations. The glass container is ini-tialized at a random position above the floor and released using rigid-body dynamics, allowing it to naturally come to rest on the floor or on top of existing furniture. This pro-cess ensures physically consistent placement while gener-ating diverse occlusion patterns with the surrounding scene geometry. All scenes are rendered using the Blender Cycles path tracer with 4096 samples per pixel and a maximum of 200 light bounces across all channels (diffuse, glossy, and trans-

(a) RGB 

(b) GT Depth 

(c) GT Normal   

> Figure 9. 3D-FRONT-T dataset. RGB, depth, and normal ground truth examples. As can be seen in the transparent surface (glass), the outgoing radiance for each pixel is entanglement of radiance from interface surface and the transmitted radiance.

mission) to accurately capture complex light interactions through transparent surfaces. For our experiments, we ren-der all images at a resolution of 960×540. For each scene, we generate camera trajectories which samples continuous viewpoints that ensure visibility of key objects including the transparent container. The example images of the dataset are shown in Fig. 9. 

A.2. Ground Truth Annotations 

For each rendered viewpoint, we provide a complete set of physically accurate ground-truth annotations tailored for evaluating scene-scale transparency reconstruction: 

RGB Images. High-fidelity renderings produced via multi-bounce path tracing in Blender Cycles. These images cap-ture intricate light behavior including interreflections, re-fractions, and transmission through transparent materials, serving as a challenging benchmark for appearance model-ing. 

Depth Maps. Metric depth is extracted directly from Blender’s rendering pipeline, ensuring physically consis-tent geometry even in regions partially occluded or viewed through transparent media. This enables rigorous evalua-tion of depth recovery in transparent scenes, a regime un-derexplored in existing benchmarks. 

Normal Maps. Per-pixel surface normals are rendered for all visible surfaces. These provide robust supervision sig-nals for assessing fine-grained geometric accuracy, indepen-dent of texture or lighting cues. Taken together, these annotations establish a comprehen-sive benchmark for transparent-scene reconstruction. To encourage reproducibility and extensibility, we will release our full dataset-generation pipeline, implemented on top of BlenderProc [7], enabling automatic synthesis of large-scale, diverse scenes with configurable and physically plau-sible object placement. 

# B. Overview of Baseline Methods 

We compare GLINT with representative Gaussian-splatting–based approaches that cover planar-constrained geometry modeling, reflective radiance modeling, and transparent-surface reconstruction. Below, we briefly sum-marize each baseline to clarify their modeling assumptions and limitations in the context of scene-scale transparency. 

2DGS [15] adopts 2D Gaussians to improve geometric ac-curacy over volumetric 3DGS. While effective for opaque surfaces, its monolithic α-compositing cannot separate in-terface geometry from secondary effects, causing transpar-ent surfaces to be ignored or entangled into a single depth layer. 

PGSR [5] extends planar-aligned Gaussian primitives with additional geometric constraints. Despite achieving sharper surface reconstruction, it shares the same opacity-based ren-dering pipeline and therefore struggles with multi-depth ra-diance, often collapsing glass regions into the background. 

Ref-GS [46] models view-dependent appearance through directional factorization, enabling more expressive specu-lar materials. However, its formulation implicitly assumes that all non-Lambertian behavior arises from surface reflec-tion, without accounting for light transmission. As a re-sult, transparent materials whose appearance is governed by both interface reflectance and background transmission are incorrectly treated as purely reflective surfaces, producing biased material estimates and degraded geometric cues in regions where transmitted radiance is dominant. 

EnvGS [39] models environment radiance using a dedi-cated set of Gaussians and performs ray-traced reflection queries, supported by a monocular normal prior to stabilize geometry estimation from limited viewpoints. While highly effective for opaque materials, it lacks any mechanism to account for light interactions through transparent surfaces, leading background content seen through glass to be incor-rectly attributed to reflections. 

TSGS [24] targets transparent objects using first-surface rasterization combined with monocular normal [41], de-lighting [41], and segmentation priors [31]. While effec-tive for thin, object-centric transparency, its formulation as-sumes a single transparent interface and does not explicitly model transmitted radiance. Consequently, scenes contain-ing multiple depth layers (e.g., glass–background–interior structures) often exhibit blurred transmission and incom-plete geometry reconstruction. The segmentation module also produces noisy or missing transparency masks, an is-sue we further analyze in the next section. Overall, existing baselines either (i) emphasize geomet-ric fidelity, (ii) specialize in reflective appearance model-ing, or (iii) operate under object-centric transparency as-sumptions. None provide a unified framework capable of addressing the inherently ill-posed nature of scene-scale transparency, where accurate reconstruction requires jointly modeling interface geometry, background transmission, and reflection. Our study bridges this gap by introducing a de-composed Gaussian representation and transparency-aware radiance transport, which together provide a more physi-cally consistent formulation for scene-scale transparency. 

# C. Additional Implementation Details 

In this section, we provide comprehensive implementation details for reproducibility, including initialization process, multi-stage optimization, and the specific loss formulations designed to ensure physical plausibility and geometric con-sistency. Our code will be made publicly available. 

Initialization. To establish a reliable geometric foun-dation, we initialize the interface Gaussian ( Gintr ) and transmission Gaussian ( Gtrans ) primitives using the sparse point cloud derived from Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [9]. Meanwhile, we follow EnvGS [39] for initializing re-flectance component ( Grefl ), where we partition the scene into N 3 sub-grids by partitioning the bounding box. Then we randomly sample K primitives within the grid where we set N = 32 and K = 5 .

Optimization Schedule. To ensure stable training, we adopt a multi-stage optimization strategy that progressively recovers scene geometry before refining complex radiance effects. We begin with a 5k-iteration warm-up stage in which only the interface component is optimized, allowing the primary surface geometry to converge. Afterward, the transmission and reflection components are introduced for joint optimization. Finally, between 40k and 60k iterations, we freeze the interface Gaussians and update only the trans-mission and reflection Gaussians to refine their radiance be-havior without destabilizing the established geometry. 

Regularization. For geometric regularization, we adopt a scale-and-shift–invariant depth loss together with anormal consistency loss, following the formulation of MonoSDF [43]. Let z denote the rendered depth from the GT Full Model w/o Gtrans w/o Grefl   

> Figure 10. Qualitative ablation study on representation components. Visual comparison between the full model and ablated variants.

interface component and ˆz the monocular depth prior pre-dicted by the encoder [26]. We align z and ˆz by solving for the optimal scale w and shift q in closed form, and define the depth loss as: 

Ldepth = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

(w z i + q − ˆzi)2 , (15) where N denotes the number of pixels in the image. This formulation removes the global scale ambiguity of monoc-ular predictions while preserving their relative depth struc-ture. The scale–shift parameters (w, q ) are recomputed for each image using the closed-form least-squares solu-tion [43]. For the normal loss, we follow the thresholded normal supervision strategy introduced in TSGS [24] to mitigate the influence of noisy monocular priors. Given the rendered normal n and the normal prior from [26] ˆn, we apply a cosine-similarity mask from 10k iterations: 

Mprior (u) = ⟨n(u), ˆn(u)⟩ ≥ τn

,

and compute the masked normal loss as: 

Lnormal = X

> u

M(u) 1 − ⟨ n(u), ˆn(u)⟩.

We set τn = 0 .3 for all experiments. 

# D. Qualitative Ablation Studies 

In this section, we present additional qualitative ablation re-sults to further elucidate the distinct roles of each compo-nent within the GLINT framework. First, we examine the impact of our decomposed rep-resentation in Fig. 10. Removing the transmission branch (Gtrans ) leads to significant entanglement between the inter-face and background content, resulting in geometric incon-sistencies and a washed-out appearance in regions observed behind glass. Excluding the reflection branch ( Grefl ) dimin-ishes specular cues, leading to a loss of realistic surface gloss, particularly on glass or highly reflective surfaces. Next, we visualize the ablation of geometry regulariza-tion losses in Fig. 11. While our framework remains rel-atively robust, removing specific losses introduces charac-teristic degradations that highlight their individual contribu-tions. Excluding the depth loss ( Ldepth ) causes inaccuracies in interface geometry placement, manifesting as deviations in absolute depth, especially for transparent surfaces. Re-moving the normal loss ( Lnormal ) results in less consistent surface orientation, which appears as locally unstable shad-ing and noisy normal transitions. When all geometric priors are removed ( Lgeo ), these artifacts accumulate, leading to noticeable distortions in depth and normal maps. This indi-cates that the geometric constraints operate complementar-ily to maintain structural fidelity. Finally, we analyze the effect of the transparency boot-strapping loss ( Ltrans ) in Fig. 12. Omitting this loss yields noisier and spatially inconsistent transparency estimates. This is because the loss utilizes 3D geometric cues de-rived from depth separation to guide the optimization to-ward sharp and physically consistent transparency bound-aries. 

# E. Comparative Analysis with Baselines 

In this section, we provide a comprehensive comparative analysis against baseline methods. We focus on three key aspects: the interpretability of radiance decomposition, the accuracy of transparency localization, and a quantitative analysis of computational costs versus reconstruction qual-ity. 

Radiance decomposition. Fig. 13 presents an extended comparison of radiance decomposition between our method and EnvGS [39]. For our method (Fig. 13(a)), the decomposed Gaussian representation enables a clear and physically grounded par-titioning of radiance. The interface component isolates the surface base color, while the reflection component captures specular highlights. Crucially, the transmission compo-nent reconstructs the background scene visible specifically through transparent surfaces, revealing the correct spatial structure behind the glass. These components form a co-herent explanation of the observed radiance, demonstrating that our explicit decomposition naturally disentangles over-lapping radiance sources in transparent regions. In contrast, EnvGS (Fig. 13(b)) focuses solely on model-ing view-dependent reflections via environment Gaussians and lacks a dedicated transmission component. Conse-quently, radiance originating from behind transparent sur-(a) Ours 

(b) w/o Ldepth 

(c) w/o Lnormal 

(d) w/o Lgeo       

> Figure 11. Effect of geometric losses. Ablating geometric supervision leads to degraded geometry reconstruction. Removing Ldepth
> produces inaccurate interface depth, removing Lnormal results in unstable surface orientation, and removing all geometric losses ( Lgeo )severely distorts both depth and normals.

faces is incorrectly entangled within its diffuse or reflec-tion modeling, leading to mixed or incomplete visual expla-nations. Furthermore, its reflection strength is modulated by a single scalar weight s, lacking the physically accurate Fresnel-driven angular dependence inherent to our formula-tion. To further validate the necessity of our decomposition, we conducted an experiment training EnvGS [39] with the geometric normal priors from DiffusionRenderer [26], iden-tical to our setup. As illustrated in Fig. 14, enforcing ge-ometric consistency on EnvGS paradoxically leads to cor-rupted appearance rendering. This degradation occurs be-cause EnvGS lacks a dedicated transmission component and fundamentally conflates transmitted and reflected radiance into a single surface interaction. Typically, EnvGS implic-itly minimizes photometric error by distorting the geome-try to effectively baking background textures onto incor-rect depths. However, when the surface geometry is en-forced via stronger priors, this compensatory mechanism is blocked. Consequently, the model is forced to approximate the superposition of multiple radiance layers onto a single interface, leading to an averaging effect that manifests as severe blurring. Figure 12. Effect of the transparency loss Ltrans . With the pro-posed transparency loss Ltrans , the learned transparency maps align well with the true transmitted content, while removing this loss leads to noisy or inconsistent transparency estimation. 

Transparency Map Comparison. We compare our learned transparency maps with those generated by Grounded-SAM-2 (G-SAM2) [31], a state-of-the-art open-world segmentation model. As illustrated in Fig. 15, al-though G-SAM2 can roughly localize transparent objects, it frequently yields spatially inconsistent or fragmented masks. Common failure cases include missing sections of glass cabinets or exhibiting severe flickering across view-points, even when utilizing the tracking mode. These limi-tations arise because G-SAM2 relies on 2D image features, which are inherently ambiguous for transparent surfaces that mix reflection and transmission, lacking a unified un-derstanding of 3D geometry. In contrast, GLINT bootstraps transparency localization by explicitly leveraging 3D geometric cues—specifically, the depth discrepancy ( ∆z) between the interface and trans-mission components that emerges during optimization and the diffuse-albedo prior from [26]. This allows our method to generate spatially coherent and boundary-sharp trans-parency maps that accurately align with the physical extent of the glass. 

Computational Costs. We report a runtime comparison with EnvGS and TSGS on the synthetic 3D-FRONT-T dataset (downscale ×2), with results summarized in Tab. B. TSGS achieves the highest speed due to rasterization-only rendering, while EnvGS adopts a hybrid formulation limited to reflection. Our method introduces additional overhead from explicit multi-component optimization and transmis-sion handling, resulting in lower throughput. However, this design choice directly supports transparent geometry mod-eling and leads to improved reconstruction quality, reflect-ing a deliberate and practical trade-off between efficiency and capability. 

# F. Discussion on Foundation Models 

In this section, we discuss the motivation behind integrating foundation models into the GLINT framework and analyze                      

> Table 4. Comparison of computational costs and reconstruction quality on the 3D-FRONT-T dataset.
> Method FPS ( ↑)Training Time ( ↓)PSNR ( ↑)MAE ( ↓)AbsRel ( ↓)TSGS [24] 159 ∼40 mins 28.80 9.89 0.08 EnvGS [39] 80 ∼1 h 33.71 14.37 0.13
> Ours 51 ∼2.5 h 34.50 7.96 0.04

the advantages of video-based priors compared to conven-tional image-based approaches in the context of transparent scene reconstruction. In our implementation, we utilize the inverse-rendering encoder of the video relighting model, DiffusionRen-derer [26], to obtain geometric (depth, normal) and mate-rial (diffuse-albedo) priors. A key motivation for choosing a video-based foundation model over monocular estimators is its multi-view consistency. Since the model leverages the architecture of Stable Video Diffusion [3], it processes mul-tiple frames in a single feed-forward pass, producing geo-metric cues that are coherent across viewpoints. This is par-ticularly crucial for transparent surfaces, where per-frame estimation often flickers or yields inconsistent depth due to view-dependent reflections. To the best of our knowledge, GLINT is the first approach to adopt video relighting pri-ors for 3D Gaussian splatting reconstruction, demonstrating that material-aware priors effectively aid in distinguishing between interface and transmitted radiance. 

Comparison with Image-based Priors. Recent ap-proaches [24, 34, 39] typically combine various image-based foundation models, such as monocular depth [4, 14], normal estimators [18, 41], and segmentation modules (e.g., Grounded-SAM [22, 31]). For instance, TSGS [24] relies on Grounded-SAM to mask transparent objects and uses StableDelight and StableNormal [41] to make the texture of the transaprent surface dinstinctive. While empirically beneficial for object-centric scenes with clear boundaries, this mask strategy often struggles with scene-scale trans-parency—such as large glass facades or windows—where semantic boundaries are ambiguous and binary segmenta-tion fails to capture the continuous transition of radiance as in Fig. 15. 

# G. Limitations and Future Work 

While GLINT achieves state-of-the-art performance in re-constructing scene-scale transparent geometry and appear-ance, there are still room for improvement in various per-spectives. In this section, we detail the discussion on the current boundary conditions of our framework and suggest potential directions to address them. 

Decomposition ambiguity under sparse observations. 

Our method implicitly relies on multi-view consistency to (a) Ours (b) EnvGS [39]         

> Figure 13. Radiance decomposition comparison. Each 2×2grid is arranged in clockwise order as rendered RGB, base color, reflection and transmission. EnvGS does not provide a transmission component, so the corresponding slot is left blank.
> (a) Ours
> (b) EnvGS [39] w/ DiffusionRenderer [26] Figure 14. Comparison with EnvGS [39] trained with a Dif-fusionRenderer [26] prior. With the DiffusionRenderer normal priors, EnvGS still fails to produce consistent depth and normals for transparent regions. In particular, the transmission surface re-mains incorrectly reconstructed, showing blurry rendering quality.

disentangle the intertwined radiance contributions from in-terface reflection and background transmission. Conse-quently, in scenarios with sparse viewpoints or limited par-allax, where a surface is observed from a stationary angle, the problem becomes inherently ill-posed. In such cases, the optimization may struggle to uniquely assign radiance to either the reflection ( Grefl ) or transmission ( Gtrans ) com-ponent. We believe that incorporating high-level semantic understanding could resolve this ambiguity. Future work could leverage vision-language models (VLMs) or unpro-jecting semantic features to enforce physically and seman-tically plausible decomposition, ensuring that regions iden-tified as glass (e.g., windows vs. mirrors) adhere to their expected optical behaviors even under constrained observa-tion. 

Recursive light transport. To maintain rendering effi-ciency and optimization stability, our current radiance trans-port formulation focuses on primary transmission and re-flection events (i.e., up to first-order interactions at the in-terface). While this approximation is sufficient for most ar-chitectural glass and display cases, it may not fully capture complex multi-bounce phenomena found in nested transpar-ent structures, such as a glass vase inside a glass cabinet or a mirror room. Extending our hybrid rendering pipeline to support recursive ray-tracing or multi-pass rendering with physically-based rendering formulation would allow for the simulation of higher-order approximation of light transport, albeit at the cost of increased computational overhead. 

# H. Additional Qualitative Results 

We present additional qualitative examples to complement the results in the main paper. Figures 16 and 17 provide further visualizations on representative scenes from both the 3D-FRONT-T benchmark and the real-world DL3DV-10K dataset [27]. We also include the video results for the visualization of the continuous frames. We kindly refer the readers to the attached supplementary videos. Reference Ours G-SAM2 [31] Reference Ours G-SAM2 [31] 

Figure 15. Comparison of transparency masks across two scenes. Each scene is shown with three viewpoints (rows), including ground-truth reference RGB (left), our predicted transparency maps (middle), and G-SAM2 [31] masks (right). GT images provide visual context, high-lighting that our method consistently isolates transparent surfaces, while Grounded-SAM2 often produces noisy, incomplete or completely missing masks. 

GT PGSR [5] EnvGS [39] TSGS [24] Ours 

Figure 16. Qualitative comparison on synthetic scenes. Each column shows results from GT, PGSR [5], EnvGS [39], TSGS [24], and Ours. For each scene, rows correspond to RGB (top), depth (middle), and normal (bottom) maps. GT PGSR [5] EnvGS [39] TSGS [24] Ours 

Figure 17. Additional qualitative comparisons on the DL3DV-10K dataset. Each column shows results from GT, PGSR [5], En-vGS [39], TSGS [24], and Ours. For each scene, rows correspond to RGB (top), depth (middle), and normal (bottom) predictions.