Title: RehearsalNeRF: Decoupling Intrinsic Neural Fields of Dynamic Illuminations for Scene Editing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27948v2

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:20:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# RehearsalNeRF: Decoupling Intrinsic Neural Fields of Dynamic Illuminations for Scene Editing 

Changyeon Won 1†, Hyunjun Jung 1†, Jungu Cho 1,3 ,Seonmi Park 1, Chi-Hoon Lee 3, Hae-Gon Jeon 2* 1Department of AI Convergence, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea. 

2Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea. 

3AI R&D Division, CJ Corporation, Seoul, Korea. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): earboll@yonsei.ac.kr; Contributing authors: cywon1997@gm.gist.ac.kr; hyunjun.jung@gm.gist.ac.kr; jungu.cho@cj.net; bluesky1000@gm.gist.ac.kr; chi.lee@cj.net; 

†These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Abstract 

Although there has been significant progress in neural radiance fields, an issue on dynamic illumination changes still remains unsolved. Different from relevant works that parameterize time-variant/-invariant components in scenes, subjects’ radiance is highly entangled with their own emitted radiance and lighting colors in spatio-temporal domain. In this paper, we present a new effective method to learn disentangled neural fields under the severe illumination changes, named 

RehearsalNeRF . Our key idea is to leverage scenes captured under stable lighting like rehearsal stages, easily taken before dynamic illumination occurs, to enforce geometric consistency between the different lighting conditions. In particular, RehearsalNeRF employs a learnable vector for lighting effects which represents illumination colors in a temporal dimension and is used to disentangle projected light colors from scene radiance. Furthermore, our RehearsalNeRF is also able to reconstruct the neural fields of dynamic objects by simply adopting off-the-shelf interactive masks. To decouple the dynamic objects, we propose a new regularization leveraging optical flow, which provides coarse supervision for the color disentanglement. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RehearsalNeRF by showing robust performances on novel view synthesis and scene editing under dynamic illumination conditions. Our source code and video datasets will be publicly available. 

1 

> arXiv:2603.27948v2 [cs.CV] 2 Apr 2026 Keywords: Neural Radiance field, Inverse Rendering, Intrinsic Decomposition

# 1 Introduction 

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) (Mildenhall et al, 2020) represent a scene as neural implicit functions and enable to render photo-realistic images from arbitrary view-points. For wider applicability of NeRFs, their variant representations for dynamic motions (Wu et al, 2022; Zhang et al, 2023; Park et al, 2021a,b; Li et al, 2021; Pumarola et al, 2021; Weng et al, 2022; Peng et al, 2021) have been actively studied. Existing dynamic radiance fields synthesize sequential frames with novel viewpoints by decoupling static and dynamic objects (Wu et al, 2022; Zhang et al, 2023), topo-logical deformation (Park et al, 2021a,b; Li et al, 2021; Pumarola et al, 2021), and human movements (Weng et al, 2022; Peng et al, 2021). It is worth noting that the word, ‘dynamic’, refers subjects’ motions only. In this work, we extend the definition of the ‘dynamic’ to varying illuminations as well as subjects’ motions during taking an input video. Estimating and manipulating scene illuminations, such as intrinsic image decompo-sition (Barrow et al, 1978; Horn, 1974), relighting (Debevec et al, 2000; Xu et al, 2018) and shape-from-shading (Zhang et al, 1999), has been considered as one of classical research issues. There is a common assumption in these works that light sources are stable and predictable. Nevertheless, the main challenge of them is that the solution is not unique due to limited image resolution, noise and inaccurate camera geometry. To alleviate the challenges, proper prior information, such as depth geometry (Chen and Koltun, 2013; El Helou et al, 2021; Maier et al, 2017), lighting directions (Somanath and Kurz, 2021; Wang et al, 2021a) and segmentation masks (Munkberg et al, 2022), is available, making their inferences more tractable. Despite the significant efforts of the previous works, there has been no attempt to explicitly handle varying illuminations in NeRFs. Unfortunately, NeRFs have no ability to learn neural fields under dynamic illuminations because the radiance of illumination can be considered as that of either static or dynamic objects, referred to 

illumination-radiance ambiguity .As the first step toward addressing this issue, we need to find a proper prior to reduce the ambiguity of dynamic illuminations in neural fields. Our key observation is that the dynamic illuminations, intense and rapid lighting intensity and color changes during recording input videos, are created artificially in controlled situations, such as plays, shows and concerts. As they often come with a rehearsal stage without the dynamic lighting effects before starting main stages, we use the video on the rehearsal stage as a prior. Although motions of the dynamic object in the rehearsal stage are not perfectly aligned with that of the main stage, it is valuable to represent scene geometry and to disentangle objects’ own colors and the dynamic lighting effects in neural fields. In this work, we present a Rehearsal prior-based Ne ural Radiance Fields (RehearsalNeRF) to synthesize and edit novel viewpoint images of a scene under 2Baseline(D 2NeRF) Baseline(D 2NeRF)   

> Input: Dynamic scene with
> dynamic lighting effects
> NeRF without
> light handling
> Decoupling dynamic lighting, dynamic
> object and static object
> Illumination
> handling
> Joint Learning
> Result: Decoupled
> dynamic object
> Motion
> Lighting Ours
> 𝝉
> 𝝉
> Ours
> Change of motion + frozen light Frozen motion + change of light Reference Frame

Fig. 1 RehearsalNeRF jointly optimizes five neural fields for dynamic lighting and static/moving subjects in a training step. Each field cannot only be rendered independently, but can also be com-posited at once to represent a whole scene. Compared to the baseline (Wu et al, 2022), the details from RehearsalNeRF are distinguishable and the rendered colors are well decoupled from the scene lights. We provide a variety of applications for video editing, such as controlling lighting while stop-ping motion and vice versa. 

dynamic lighting environments. As shown in Fig. 1, our RehearsalNeRF learns to decouple dynamically changing illuminations and dynamic/static objects, simultane-ously. To do this, we exploit the fact that scene geometry is consistent regardless of the lighting changes, except for regions of moving subjects, and the principle that a color is sum of emitted light energy from a surface. Our RehearsalNeRF first takes both rehearsal and main stage videos as inputs. With these inputs, we reconstruct three neural fields for static, dynamic objects and dynamically changing illuminations from lighting effects, respectively. To be specific, we develop a joint optimization for decoupling dynamic illuminations from moving/static objects in the scene. The main challenges of the joint optimiza-tion are two-fold: (1) optimizing dynamic illuminations is highly ill-posed due to the illumination-radiance ambiguity. Moreover, rapid illumination changes make learning radiance fields difficult; (2) learning a density field of dynamic objects is disturbed by shading changes from the illuminations as well. To solve the problems, we first introduce a learnable illumination vector to dis-entangle time-variant global and local illuminations of scenes. Different from existing appearance methods (Martin-Brualla et al, 2021; Tancik et al, 2022), it is an explicit representation with editable capability. We then find dense correspondences between a main stage and its rehearsal stage via optical flow estimation to account for color information of dynamic objects. Because optical flow is erroneous due to the illumina-tion difference between them, we apply a regularizeration for the temporally consistent prediction. Finally, we design an additional regularizer using the rehearsal prior for robust supervision to decouple illuminations and static objects’ own colors. We demonstrate the effectiveness of RehearsalNeRF by qualitatively and quantita-tively evaluating it over state-of-the-art methods for NeRFs in the dynamic domain. In addition, our work is also applicable to areas of video manipulations including freezing motions under varying lights and vice versa. 32 Related Works 

Dynamic neural scene representations There are three types of works catego-rizing dynamic neural scene representations: deformation of non-rigid parts, motions with human priors and decoupling dynamic part. To represent moving/deformable objects in a scene, D-NeRF (Pumarola et al, 2021) proposes neural implicit representations consisting of deformation fields and canonical fields to handle non-rigid motions. Nerfies (Park et al, 2021a) uses per-frame defor-mation latent codes, instead of time-stamps. HyperNeRF (Park et al, 2021b) extends the Nerfies to account for topological changes using high-dimensional hyperspace. For human motions, H-NeRF (Xu et al, 2021) and HumanNeRF (Weng et al, 2022) use human body templates (Alldieck et al, 2021; Loper et al, 2015) to train the person in a canonical space. RigNeRF (Athar et al, 2022) focuses on the deformation of head-pose and facial expressions using 3D morphable face model (Blanz and Vetter, 1999). Here, the template misalignment often has negative impacts on the reconstruction quality. To separate moving foregrounds from static backgrounds, several works have used priors such as optical flow (Li et al, 2021; Gao et al, 2021), 3D depth (Li et al, 2021; Gao et al, 2021; Xian et al, 2021) and segmentation masks (Zhang et al, 2021a; Tschernezki et al, 2021; Li et al, 2023; Jiang et al, 2022). Without any prior informa-tion, D 2NeRF (Wu et al, 2022) decouples static and dynamic components, and handles shadow effects of moving objects in a self-supervised manner. NeRFPlayer (Song et al, 2023) predicts sample-wise probabilities of being static, deforming and newness in a 4D spatio-temporal space. However, the previous works assume that a dynamic scene is under stable illumi-nation conditions, and focus only on separating moving contents from static ones. In this case, the illumination-radiance ambiguity still remains, making them to confuse static objects as dynamic components. 

Neural representations for lighting and editing Thanks to the powerful 3D scene and light modeling capacities of neural implicit representations, there have been widely studied in intrinsic image decomposition (Ye et al, 2023), inverse render-ing (Munkberg et al, 2022; Boss et al, 2021a,b, 2022; Srinivasan et al, 2021; Zhang et al, 2021b; Lyu et al, 2022; Zhang et al, 2022) and shape-from-shading (Ling et al, 2023; Yang et al, 2022; Zeng et al, 2023). Works in (Munkberg et al, 2022; Boss et al, 2021a,b, 2022; Srinivasan et al, 2021; Zhang et al, 2021b; Lyu et al, 2022) jointly optimize lighting, materials and scene geometry from multi-view images for neural representations using a differentiable renderer which is a learnable implemen-tation of physically-based rendering (PBR) equation. Relighting (Srinivasan et al, 2021; Lyu et al, 2022) with neural representations deals with global illuminations, 3D geometry and material information from a set of images with unconstrained known lighting locations. NeRV (Srinivasan et al, 2021) takes multiple images captured under known lighting conditions and produces a 3D representation of a scene, enabling to render novel viewpoint images with arbitrary lighting directions. ShadowNeuS (Ling et al, 2023) uses a shadow ray supervision to reconstruct neural signed distance fields from single-view images under multiple lighting conditions. IRON (Zhang et al, 2022) improves a quality of geometry predictions and achieves the better relighting results by leveraging depth discontinuity on sampling. Recently, an inverse rendering done by 4(Sec. III.A)  

> 𝜓 𝑆
> 𝜓 𝐷
> 𝜓 𝐿
> 𝑣 ℎ
> (S,V)
> 𝑃 𝐻

σ 𝑃 𝐻 𝑣 ℎ(t) = 𝐻        

> 𝑐 𝐿 𝑓 𝑟𝑔𝑏
> ℒr𝑒ℎ
> (Sec. III.D)
> Main stage መ𝐶 𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛 Static objects 𝑆
> Lighting effects 𝐿
> ℒdyn (Sec. III.C)
> (Sec. III.B)
> ℒrecon
> Volume rendering
> Rendering
> Time
> 3D
> coord .
> View
> dir.
> 𝐱
> 𝐝
> 𝜏
> 𝜓 𝐼
> 𝜓 𝐴 𝑐 𝐷
> 𝜎 𝐷
> 𝑐 𝑆
> 𝜎 𝑆
> 𝑖
> ×
> Intensity 𝐼
> Dynamic objects 𝐷
> Rehearsal stage መ𝐶 𝑟𝑒ℎ
> 𝐶 𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛

Fig. 2 An overview of RehearsalNeRF in training phase. Our RehearsalNeRF consists of five neural fields for rendering static, dynamic objects and illuminations. Each field takes location ( x), viewing direction ( d) and time-stamp ( τ ) for the same sample point as input, except the time-stamp for the static fields. They are used to infer the radiance. Particularly, the illumination field predicts the probability PH of the illumination vector vh corresponding to τ . To decouple static/dynamic objects and illumination components of the main stage video well, two additional regularizations, Lreh and 

Ldyn , using the rehearsal prior, are designed. 

optimizing 3D Gaussians (Shi et al, 2023; Liang et al, 2023) are proposed and shows faithful relighting results using PBR. We note that they only handle object-centric scenes with 360 ◦ observations. Intrin-sicNeRF (Ye et al, 2023), which seems be similar with ours, optimizes editable neural representation of room-scale scenes. This decomposes a scene into reflectance and shad-ing using a basic illumination model (Phong, 1975), but does not handle time-variant lighting effects. 

Appearance embedding for NeRF Following generative latent optimiza-tion (Bojanowski et al, 2018), many NeRF extensions use trainable latent codes for per-image appearance variations (Martin-Brualla et al, 2021; Turki et al, 2022; Tan-cik et al, 2022), time-varying components (Li et al, 2022b; Park et al, 2021a,b) and manipulation (Schwarz et al, 2020; Wang et al, 2022; Niemeyer and Geiger, 2021). NeRF-in-the-wild (Martin-Brualla et al, 2021) proposes a latent appearance modeling to address the scene inconsistency caused by different lighting conditions of unstruc-tured photo-collections. Mega-NeRF (Turki et al, 2022) and Block-NeRF (Tancik et al, 2022) handle the issue in large-scale scenes by embedding scene appearances like illu-mination changes according to camera poses into latent codes. DyNeRF (Li et al, 2022b) uses NeRF framework as a baseline and use temporal latent codes, allowing neural fields to be changed in time domain. CLIP-NeRF (Wang et al, 2022) shows editable NeRF with text prompts to manipulate shapes and appearances of neu-ral fields. GRAF (Schwarz et al, 2020) and GIRAFFE (Niemeyer and Geiger, 2021) present 3D-aware controllable image synthesis using conditional neural fields. The objective of appearance embedding in the above methods is to facilitate matching with a canonical appearance for images under varying illuminations, yet cannot disentan-gle lighting effects from the scene. In contrast, our appearance embedding learns to explain dynamic lighting changes over time and shows the editable capability such as relighting and illumination color tune. 5Main stage – Rehearsal stage            

> Time
> 𝜓 𝐿
> 𝑃 𝐻 𝑣 ℎ
> Illumination
> vector
> Sliced
> on 𝜏
> Predicted
> with 𝜏
> Main stage Decoupled object Rehearsal
> ⨂
> Back prop.
> Illumination vector 𝑣 ℎ
> Top -𝑘  hue
> (a) Initialization of learnable illumination vector (b) Learning illumination vector
> Prediction
> hue selection Color matching

Fig. 3 Visualizations of the procedure how to work the illumination vector. (a) The initialization of the learnable illumination vector is done by sampling the hue channel of the dynamic lighting from the difference between the rehearsal and the main stage video. (b) Back propagation from the rendered hue channel is achieved by computing a weighted sum of the probability PH and the slice of the vh for time τ , which finally optimize the hue channel of the dynamic lighting effects. 

# 3 Methodology 

Given a camera ray r(t) = o + td with near and far bound tn and tf , respectively, where o is a ray origin and d ∈ R3 is a ray direction, NeRFs render view dependent colors ˜C(r) as follows: 

˜C(r) =

Z tf

> tn

T (t)σ(r(t)) c(r(t), d) dt, s.t. T (t) = exp 



−

Z ttn

σ(r(s)) ds 



, (1) where c(x, d) and σ(x) denote a spatially-view-dependent radiance and a spatially-dependent density at spatial location x ∈ R3 with a depth t, respectively. With the radiance fields of the scene built, we propose a novel neural scene representation pipeline which decouples components of dynamic lighting effects and objects, depicted in Fig. 2. We refer to a scene with both dynamic illuminations and objects as main stage , and without them as rehearsal stage . We first handle dynamic illumination change through separate neural fields (3.1) with a learnable illumination vector (3.2). Then, we jointly optimize to resolve the illumination-radiance ambiguity on dynamic (3.3) and static objects (3.4) with the proposed two regularizers. 

3.1 NeRF for Dynamic Illuminations 

For decoupling illuminations from static and dynamic objects each, we adopt D2NeRF (Wu et al, 2022) as a baseline, and compute a density σS and a radiance cS

of static objects by using MLP layers ψS . We also calculate a density σD and a radi-ance cD of dynamic objects from another MLP layers ψD . We thus obtain a radiance 

cL of a dynamic illuminations by building multiple neural fields, whose overall process is denoted as function FL below: 

ψS : ( x, d) → (σS , cS ), ψ D : ( x, d, τ ) → (σD , cD ),ψA : ( cx, cL) → (αx), FL : ( x, d, τ ) → (cL), s.t. x ∈ [S, D ], (2) 6where τ ∈ R is a temporal coordinate, and the MLP ψA predicts a brightness of the illumination entangled with static and dynamic objects, αS ∈ R3 and αD ∈ R3,respectively. Here, we reformulate the volume rendering of NeRF (Mildenhall et al, 2020) as an explicit way to form editable radiances. We first introduce a learnable illumination vector vh for a self-supervision of the illuminations generated by light sources, and the function FL to render time-varying illumination radiance cL, consisting of a neural field ψL. Details for the illumination vector and rendering the radiance of dynamic illumination cL with FL will be described in 3.2. The composite rendering of the baseline (Wu et al, 2022) assumes that placing objects in the same position is physically impossible. However, the lighting effects exist on object surfaces in our problem setup. Considering this property, we modify the composite rendering equation for static and dynamic objects in the main stage by combining the radiances of illuminations as below 1:

CSmain =

Z tf

> tn

T ′σS β(cS + αS ⊙ cL) dt, CDmain =

Z tf

> tn

T ′σD β(cD + αD ⊙ cL) dt, 

s.t. T ′(t) = exp 



−

Z ttn

(σS (r(s)) + σD (r(s), τ )) ds 



and β(x) = xx + 1 , (3) where CSmain and CDmain are the rendered color of the static and dynamic objects in main stage, respectively. The β is the tone-mapping operator (Srinivasan et al, 2021) and ⊙ is the Hadamard operator. In this equation, α plays a role in a balancing term for the brightness of reflected rays in illuminations. The brightness α depends on both radiance of objects and illuminations because an amount of the reflected light energy is closely related to the surface color. For example, a blue-colored surface reflects wavelength radiations for blue color when an incident light color is white. When a blue-colored light is projected onto a blue- and red-colored surface, the blue-colored surface becomes brighter while the red-colored surface absorbs the light. Based on Eq. 3, the colors of the main stage Cmain and lighting effects CLmain can be rendered individually as follows: 

Cmain (r, τ ) = CSmain (r, τ ) + CDmain (r, τ ),

where CLmain (r, τ ) = 

Z tf

> tn

T ′σS β(αS ⊙ cL) dt +

Z tf

> tn

T ′σD β(αD ⊙ cL) dt. (4) The color of static objects ˜CS and dynamic objects ˜CD without any dynamic illumi-nation can be rendered based on Eq. 1 by using its corresponding density and radiance field from ψS and ψD , respectively.   

> 1We omit writing tfor the simplicity from now

73.2 Learning Illumination Vector 

Artificial lights in the main stage emit highly saturated colors, and the light energy varies according to a physical distance between the light source and its projected surface. In contrast, the hue channel of the light source is invariant to the distance. It means that the hue values are globally similar in the whole scene (Zimmer et al, 2011). Due to this property, we utilize HSV color space to represent the radiance field for lighting effects, instead of conventional RGB color space. For hue values H, we formulate vh as a global, explicit and learnable component that contains candidate hue information of dynamic illuminations along with the time domain, as inspired by the concept of Ye et al (2023) and Meka et al (2016). As shown in Fig. 3 (a), for effectively training vh, we initialize the vh by taking centroids of k-means clustering (Meka et al, 2016) of the hue values that have different colors between the rehearsal and the main stage scene. Fig. 3 (b) describes that the back propagation across the dynamic illumination rendering pipeline updates vh. To render the dynamic illumination from the function in Eq. 2, we first build two neural fields, ψL and ψI , to infer HSV color and intensity 

i ∈ R of the dynamic illumination, respectively: 

ψL : ( x, d, τ ) → (S, V, PH , σ L), ψI : ( x, d, τ ) → (i). (5) At last, we compute a saturation channel S, a value channel V of the radiance and a probability vector PH from ψL, whose number of candidates is k. PH is used to calculate the hue channel H corresponding to hue values of vh in a time τ , and the color of dynamic illumination can be computed as below: 

H =

> k

X

> j=1

PH,j vh,j (τ ), cL = frgb (H, S, V ) × i, (6) where vh,j (τ ) is a hue candidate at a specific time τ and hue index j. PH,j is the probability corresponding to the vh,j (τ ), and frgb is a function for converting HSV to RGB channels. The vh(τ ) is an explicit vector and capable of explaining spatially-invariant illumination colors. PH contributes to continuous hue value expression across the image. In total, we can render the radiance of the dynamic illumination cL.

3.3 Regularization for Illuminations on Dynamic Objects 

As done in the baseline (Wu et al, 2022), decoupling dynamic and static components can be achieved with two separate neural radiance fields. However, it is infeasible to extract dynamic illuminations because the color changes of the scene do not depend on the illumination changes only, especially for dynamic objects by their motions. We address this problem by leveraging the illumination vector vh as a prior to identifying color of rays scattered by the light sources and the rehearsal prior. As shown in Fig. 3 (b), vh facilitates to account for the illuminations on dynamic objects. If the hue values of pixels belonging to moving objects are similar to vh, we can effectively render their colors, entangled with the ray colors, using knowledge of vh. Then, the entangled 8colors can be effectively disentangled when the rehearsal prior provides colors of the dynamic objects as a coarse supervision. In consideration of this observation, we design a regularization Ldynamic which establishes a link of color information between the rehearsal prior and the dynamic object’s neural field ψD using optical flow (Teed and Deng, 2020) G as follows: 

Ldyn (r, τ ) = Mmain ∥Ereh →main {G reh →main (Mreh ⊙ ˆCreh ) − ˜CD }∥ 22

+

> 2

X

> i=−2

∥Edynamic τ +i→τ {G dynamic τ +i→τ ( ˜CD (r, τ + i)) − ˜CD (r, τ )}∥ 22, (7) where Greh →main is the optical flow from rehearsal video to main stage video, and 

Gdynamic τ +i→τ is the optical flow between the rendered dynamic object at time τ + i and time τ . E refers to the confidence of the optical flow prediction (Li et al, 2019), ˆCreh is a color of rehearsal video, and Mmain and Mreh are binary masks of moving objects, predicted by an off-the-shelf interactive segmentation (Cheng et al, 2021), from main stage and rehearsal video, respectively. To decouple the moving objects from the illuminations, this regularization cooperates with the color supervision in which the dynamic illumination is rendered: 

Lrecon (r, τ ) = ∥ ˆCmain (r, τ ) − Cmain (r, τ )∥22, (8) where ˆCmain (r, t ) is the true color of the camera ray r at time τ in the main stage. The regularization in Eq. 7 also guides to learn the temporal coherency among the predicted colors of the dynamic objects. It helps the ψD to overcome the illumination-radiance ambiguity because the dynamic objects’ own colors are not changed significantly over time. 

3.4 Regularization for Illuminations on Static Objects 

Apart from the illumination vector vh for dynamic objects, illuminations on static objects should be considered. Here, we use the rehearsal prior one more time as in Sec. 3.3. Since the rehearsal prior provides information for scene geometry and subjects’ original colors, we expect it to work in the static objects. We train our radiance fields representing the static objects ψS with the rehearsal prior based on a loss Lreh which is defined as below: 

Lreh (r, τ ) = (1 − M reh )∥ ˆCreh (r, τ ) − ˜CS (r, τ )∥22

+ (1 − M main )∥ ˆCmain (r, τ ) − CSmain (r, τ )∥22

+ (1 − M main )∥ ˜CS (r, τ ) − ( ˜CS (r, τ ) + ˜CD (r, τ )) ∥22, (9) where ˆCreh (r, t ) refers to the ground-truth color in the rehearsal stage. The first and second terms in 9 induce disentangling dynamic illuminations and static objects. The illumination-radiance ambiguity is resolved by leveraging the color of the rehearsal prior. The optimization of the illumination vector vh is conducted through rendering 9the main stage. The third term mitigates the problem of neural fields not being learned in regions where Mreh and Mmain do not overlap in the rendered image by providing a self-supervision for these regions. One important byproduct of this term is that, at this point, our method works in the absence of dynamic objects in the rehearsal stage. We can thus avoid a motion alignment issue between the main and rehearsal stage. Lastly, the remaining issue is to disentangle static and dynamic objects. We address this issue by designing another regularization as below: 

Lp(r, τ ) = Mmain 

σS (r, τ )

σS (r, τ ) + σD (r, τ ) + (1 − M main ) σD (r, τ )

σS (r, τ ) + σD (r, τ ) . (10) This regularization penalizes static objects in density fields, and vise versa. Thanks to this, we can decouple them in the density fields. 

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Implementation Details 

The neural fields ( ψS , ψD and ψL) of our RehearsalNeRF are implemented with a hybrid model of K-Planes (Fridovich-Keil et al, 2023) and D 2NeRF (Wu et al, 2022). Note that the neural fields can be replaced by other dynamic NeRF models. A training procedure of RehearsalNeRF requires a day for 120K iterations with 3,072 batch sizes on a single RTX 3090 GPU. We train our RehearsalNeRF with the following loss L :

L(r, τ ) = Lrecon (r, τ ) + λdyn Ldyn (r, τ ) + λreh Lreh (r, τ ) + λpLp(r, τ ). (11) In our implementation, λdyn , λreh and λp are empirically set to 0.01, 0.5 and 0.01, respectively. In the experiments, we set the number of clustering of k-means algorithm to 5 because of the number of light sources in the main stages. 

4.2 Experiment Setup 

Datasets. Since public datasets for dynamic NeRFs (Li et al, 2022b; Broxton et al, 2020) are limited to scenes captured under stable illuminations, we construct a video dataset for dance stages taken under dynamic colored lighting environments. Follow-ing the problem setting, our dataset contains pre-captured rehearsal videos under the stable lighting conditions before turning on the dynamic illuminations. Camera parameters are obtained from COLMAP (Sch¨ onberger and Frahm, 2016). We build a dataset consisting of synchronized multi-view videos whose spatial and temporal res-olutions are 2704 ×1520 and 120 FPS, respectively. For this, we use an array of 20 GoPro HERO cameras and take 10 video clips whose running time is 2.5 seconds. In the experiment, we downsample the spatial resolution by a factor of 2 and the frame rate to 30 FPS, similar to the previous work (Li et al, 2022b). As mentioned earlier, our work is the first attempt to handle dynamic illuminations in NeRF, and we cannot carry out an apple-to-apple comparison with publicly available neural rendering methods. Therefore, we have no choice but to conduct a limited 10 NVS Main stage(GT)  Static only  Dynamic only  Illum. only   

> D2NeRF K-Planes
> TensoIR
> PBR
> TensoIR
> VR
> Ours
> Scene editing
> N/A
> N/A
> N/A
> N/A
> N/A N/A
> N/A N/A
> N/A
> N/A

Fig. 4 Qualitative comparisons on our real-world dataset. The goal of scene editing is to render the red-colored illumination. Only our method produces the high-quality edited scenes through the successful dynamic illumination decomposition. 

Table 1 Quantitative comparison of novel view synthesis performance on our real-world dataset. We compare results from the original dataset and the temporally subsampled version (taking every 5th frame) to evaluate robustness against rapid scene dynamics.                                                             

> Method Original Dataset Subsampled Dataset ( 5×Speed) Full Image Dynamic Objects Full Image Dynamic Objects PSNR ↑SSIM ↑PSNR ↑SSIM ↑PSNR ↑SSIM ↑PSNR ↑SSIM ↑
> D2NeRF (Wu et al, 2022) 29.776 0.857 22.962 0.978 28.274 0.853 21.899 0.976 K-Planes (Fridovich-Keil et al, 2023) 28.113 0.867 25.122 0.984 27.849 0.854 25.784 0.986 TensoIR PBR (Jin et al, 2023) 18.681 0.707 16.934 0.972 16.955 0.708 15.347 0.971 TensoIR VR (Jin et al, 2023) 28.663 0.865 21.918 0.978 28.389 0.848 23.238 0.981 4DGaussian (Wu et al, 2024) 28.199 0.851 24.523 0.984 28.189 0.842 24.245 0.983
> Ours 28.250 0.851 26.318 0.986 28.666 0.845 27.090 0.988

evaluation of dynamic lighting effects. Unfortunately, it is infeasible to obtain the ground truth dynamic lighting effects which are highly entangled in the objects. As an alternative, we additionally collect a synthetic dataset simulated by Unity (Juliani et al, 2018). This dataset consists of 4 scenes whose number of frames is 30, and diverse lighting and motions exist. 

Comparison methods. For strictly fair comparison, we modify comparison meth-ods for handling dynamic illuminations as below: (1) D 2NeRF (Wu et al, 2022) disentangles dynamic and static objects. As in Park et al (2021b), using it as a baseline, we apply an appearance latent vector to embed the illumination environment. The latent vector allow us to interpolate and manipulate the lighting changes. (2) K-Planes (Fridovich-Keil et al, 2023) consists of six planes to represent dynamic motions. By adding time-variant appearance embedding to their 4D dynamic volume representation, we can manipulate the time-variant illumination. (3) TensoIR (Jin et al, 2023) also introduces an appearance tensor, so we can learn and infer the time-varying illumination and editing. We adopt the same training scheme 11 Ours D2NeRF  TensoIR VR  TensoIR PBR  4DGaussian  K-Planes   

> Scene 16 -frame 16 Fig. 5 Qualitative comparison of novel view synthesis performance for dynamic objects on our real-world dataset. The second row presents error map between rendered image and GT. Our model consistently achieves superior quality in dynamic regions.

with Chen and Liu (2022). TensoIR is optimized by using physically based rendering (PBR) with the help of volume rendering (VR). Both results are reported in this evaluation. (4) 4DGaussian (Wu et al, 2024) leverages a 4D voxel field to decode temporal features for 3DGS parameters, enabling dynamic scene representation. However, it does not separate dynamic illumination from dynamic objects. To verify the impact of this limitation, we measure its novel view synthesis performance, focusing on how well it reconstructs dynamic objects under dynamic illuminations. 

4.3 Results for Novel View Synthesis 

We evaluate the novel view synthesis (NVS) performance of RehearsalNeRF using PSNR and SSIM (Wang et al, 2004) as quantitative metrics. Evaluations are conducted on both our real-world dataset and a synthetic dataset that simulates dance stages with complex illumination. We first evaluate ReheasrsalNeRF on our real-world dataset in in Tab. 1. Regard-ing the results, D 2NeRF and K-Planes exhibit the higher PSNR and SSIM values than ours. That is because of their overfitting issue. They directly learn highly entan-gled color representations without considering the illumination–radiance ambiguity over time, and the naive appearance embeddings used in these methods are insuffi-cient to disentangle the radiance fields of dynamic objects from illumination. TensoIR with PBR fails because the illumination change disturbs learning scene geometry. Meanwhile, TensoIR with VR renders plausible results because it also overfits to the illumination changes in the radiance field. Consequently, this overfitting degrades their ability to accurately reconstruct dynamic objects (see Fig. 5) and further limits their scene-editing capabilities (as demonstrated in Fig. 4). To verify that the baselines’ high performance stems from overfitting rather than true robustness, we conducted further evaluations on more dynamic scenarios. We con-structed a temporally subsampled dataset by taking every 5 th frame from the original videos, effectively simulating rapid motion (5 × speed). While existing approaches lack the capability to handle such rapid dynamics, our pipeline is specifically designed to 12 Ground Truth  Ours D2NeRF  K-Planes TensoIR VR  TensoIR PBR  4DGaussian Fig. 6 Qualitative comparison of NVS performance for dynamic objects on the temporally sub-sampled real-world dataset. Due to rapid motion, baselines struggle to reconstruct the fine details of dynamic objects. 

Table 2 Quantitative evaluation for novel view synthesis and scene editing on our synthetic dataset with state-of-the-art methods. To evaluate scene editing performance, we construct a synthetic video dataset with time-shifted lighting effects relative to the original video used as the learning objective.                              

> Method Novel View Synthesis Scene Editing PSNR ↑SSIM ↑PSNR ↑SSIM ↑
> D2NeRF (Wu et al, 2022) 27.234 0.872 25.201 0.864 K-Planes (Fridovich-Keil et al, 2023) 27.495 0.864 25.783 0.853 TensoIR PBR (Jin et al, 2023) 15.056 0.668 15.153 0.671 TensoIR VR (Jin et al, 2023) 28.769 0.885 27.762 0.883 Ours 30.117 0.883 29.186 0.878

disentangle dynamic lighting from dynamic objects. As reported in Tab. 1, although K-Planes maintains a marginal lead in SSIM for full images, our method achieves the highest PSNR across all compared models. Crucially, as scene dynamics increase, competing methods suffer significant degradation due to severe color inconsistencies. This trend is particularly evident in the dynamic object evaluation, where our method demonstrates superior fidelity. This observation is qualitatively corroborated by Fig. 6, which illustrates the loss of fine details in dynamic objects produced by the baselines. Our robustness is further demonstrated on our synthetic dataset in Tab. 2and Fig. 7, which features severe lighting conditions. Although the videos suffer from the degradation of the objects’ textures (Fig. 8 (b)) and saturated colors (Fig. 8 (c)), our disentanglement technique operates to characterize the extent of temporal changes of pixels related to the lighting effects. Please refer to our Appendix C.2 for more analysis. 

4.4 Results for Scene Editing 

Quantitative comparison. Our ultimate goal of this work is to show the capability of the explicit representation for dynamic illuminations. To demonstrate it, we propose an exclusive evaluation protocol that generates lighting effects of videos in time from its 10-frame shifted version. The scene editing evaluation is conducted on our synthetic dataset. 13 NVS SE        

> D2NeRF K-Planes TensoIR PBR TensoIR VR Ours GT

Fig. 7 Qualitative comparison for scene editing on the synthetic dataset. The comparison methods fail to handle the harsh illuminations, mistakenly optimizing dynamic lights as dynamic objects. (b ) Texture degradation  (c) High saturation (a) Real -world dataset 

Fig. 8 Examples from our real-world (a) and synthetic datasets (b,c). The synthetic dataset allows us to test ours and the comparison models in severe illumination conditions, including (b) texture degradation and (c) highly saturated regions. 

Table 3 Quantitative comparison of dynamic lighting disentanglement on our synthetic dataset. We report L2 loss, L1 loss, and PSNR. 

Method L2 (×1000) ↓ L1 (×1000) ↓ PSNR ↑

K-Planes 14.897 81.276 19.523 D2NeRF 3.147 17.811 25.245 

Ours 0.398 7.630 34.972 

For strictly fair comparison, we replace the appearance time code for D 2NeRF and K-Planes, which is embedded in a training phase. For TensoIR, we make the shifted version of the appearance tensor by 10 frames in a lighting dimension. In Tab. 2, our method outperforms them. If the illumination is incorrectly decou-pled, the predicted colors of objects differ from their original colors, which have a negative impact on the PSNR values of the comparison methods. 

Qualitative comparison. Fig. 4 shows the qualitative comparisons on our real-world dataset for scene editing and its corresponding scene decomposition. For scene editing, we extract an appearance embedding from a red-colored illumination in the main stage video frame, and use it as the appearance vector. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the comparison methods, adopting implicit representation for dynamic components, face the challenges in lighting color synthesis. Furthermore, the scene decomposition into simple dynamic and static objects suffers from rendering them under the entangled illuminations. In particular, they fail to represent spread lighting effects on dynamic objects. In contrast, our RehearsalNeRF demonstrates the remarkable capabilities in both scene editing and decomposition. In the synthetic dataset, as shown in Fig. 7, ours reveals the significant performance gap from the comparison methods. 14 Ground Truth  Ours  D2NeRF  K-Planes  

> Dynamic lighting effects
> Error Map Fig. 9 Qualitative comparison of dynamic lighting disentanglement.

Dynamic light disentanglement To evaluate the quality of dynamic lighting dis-entanglement, as shown in Ground Truth of Fig. 9, we obtain ground truth dynamic lighting effects maps by calculating the difference between images from the main and rehearsal stages, while masking out dynamic objects. For the baselines, we extract dynamic lighting effects by subtracting the rendered static parts from the full rendered images. We then quantify the performance by measuring the errors between the ground truth maps and the estimated lighting effects from the baselines. The quantitative and qualitative results are demonstrated in Tab. 3 and Fig. 9, respectively. 

Application. RehearsalNeRF allows to control scene components like subjects’ motions and illuminations using our novel explicit and continuous representation. In Fig. 10 (a), we can change the time zone of the lighting by tuning τ on the illumina-tion vector vh. We can also manipulate the illumination colors by manually defining colors of vh, whose example is in Fig. 10 (b). As shown in Fig. 10 (c), we can mod-ulate the light brightness with the intensity value i of ψI , and artificially make the spatially-varying intensity by assigning new factors to the i.In the Appendix A, we also show an interesting application to confocal fluorescence microscopy, which makes novel viewpoint images on both cells and tissues captured under multiple light sources with different wavelengths. 

4.5 Ablation Study 

In Tab. 4 and Fig. 12, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the regularization Ldyn ,

Lreh , the hue initialization for illumination vector vh, ψA, and our novel rendering procedure of light colors cL in Sec. 3.2. Each component contributes to the performance of our RehearsalNeRF, whose analyses are described below: (1) Without Ldyn , SSIM values slightly increase due to optical flow confidence pre-dictions, where reliable pixels are sparsely distributed. It offers a limited supervision of rehearsal prior. Although the radiance field attempts to recover a continuous sig-nal, the discrete nature of rehearsal prior observations can degrade the SSIM values. Conversely, PSNR values may improve as it focuses on minimizing the mean-squared error in ours. (2) Learning ψA enables the accurate color representation when illuminations have a impact on surface appearances. Conversely, omitting ψA results in the lower PSNR 15 Ref.           

> (a)
> (b)
> (c)
> Brighter 𝑖 Darker 𝑖 Left -bright 𝑖 Middle -bright 𝑖 Right -bright 𝑖 Zero intensity

Fig. 10 Qualitative results for scene editing. (a) We shift the lighting effects to the former frame (see yellow allows). Note that, we do not modify the intensity of illuminations at this point. (b) We tune vh with the red-colored illumination. (c) An impact on the modified intensity value i. We can infer the brighter and darker illumination by applying the lower and higher value of i, respectively. Plus, we can implement the spatially-variant adjustment. 1) Novel View  

> Synthesis
> Experimental Results
> Input
> Rehearsal Stage
> Rendered
> Rehearsal Stage
> Mis -
> aligned
> View
> Aligned View
> 2) Re hea sal
> NeR FInput
> Main Stage
> K-Planes

Fig. 11 Handling a large misalignment of cameras between the main stage and the rehearsal stage. 

Table 4 Ablation study for NVS on both real-world and synthetic dataset, and SE. 

NVS(Real-world) NVS(Synthetic) SE(Synthetic) PSNR SSIM PSNR SSIM PSNR SSIM Ours 28.250 0.851 30.117 0.883 29.186 0.878 w/o Ldyn 27.787 0.859 29.769 0.879 25.948 0.859 w/o Lreh 27.845 0.827 25.896 0.852 25.190 0.846 w/o vh hue init. 27.378 0.832 29.439 0.878 28.574 0.872 w/o ψA 28.229 0.845 30.040 0.885 29.104 0.880 

w direct ψL → cL 28.345 0.816 28.908 0.871 27.820 0.864 

but higher SSIM because static objects are dominant in a scene. Static objects show color variations solely caused by dynamic illuminations, whereas dynamic objects are influenced by both their motions and dynamic illuminations. Therefore, for static objects, optimizing ψA may be unnecessary, as the continuous representation tends to yield smooth results, which might reduce the SSIM values. (3) We can compute the illumination color cL directly from the neural field ψL,bypassing the method in Sec. 3.2. It unexpectedly achieves the higher PSNR values for real-world novel view synthesis. However, this may indicate a potential overfit-ting issue where ψL learns the entangled lighting colors on object surfaces. They also lack scene editing capabilities demonstrated in Sec. 4.4 because they are able to only manipulate the appearance embedding. 16 N/A 

N/A              

> N/A
> Static
> objects
> Dynamic
> objects
> Illum -
> ination
> w/o ℒ𝑑𝑦𝑛 w/o ℒ𝑟𝑒ℎ
> Scene
> editing
> Render
> w/o 𝑣 ℎhue init Ours w direct 𝜓 𝐿 →𝑐 𝐿 w/o 𝜓 𝐴 GT
> Rehearsal
> Target frame Target frame

Fig. 12 Visualizations of the results on ablation study. We can see that each component of our RehearsalNeRF contributes to the visually pleasing looks. The dynamic object disappearance (yellow arrow), incorrect scene editing (green arrow) and inaccurate shadow (blue arrow) are observed if we do not have either one of the proposed components. 

Table 5 Quantitative result for experiments with time mis-sync rehearsal videos. 

Ours +30 frame shift +60 frame shift Only use 1 st frame PSNR SSIM PSNR SSIM PSNR SSIM PSNR SSIM 28.046 0.883 28.039 0.882 28.069 0.883 28.005 0.881 Ground Truth  Ours  Lighting Effects  Dynamic Objects 

Fig. 13 Experimental results when the subjects are captured with the bulky LED screen. Adjusting the hyper-parameter k makes it possible to represent complex lighting effects, such as those from an LED screen. 

4.6 Analysis 

Due to several assumptions (eg, aligned cameras between rehearsal and main stages) in this pipeline, RehearsalNeRF may not seem to address various real-world scenarios. In this section, we address concerns about practicality and show the robustness of our RehearsalNeRF in many scenarios. 

Camera setups Our work assumes that the cameras between the main stage and rehearsal stage are aligned, as it utilizes the difference in pixel values to initialize the 17 Rehearsal video  … … …       

> Mis -aligned rehearsal GT Rendering Static Dynamic Illumination
> Only use 1 st frame
> +30 frame shifted
> +60 frame shifted

Fig. 14 Experimental results with non-synchronized rehearsal video input. The time shift between the rehearsal and main stage videos results in a misalignment of dynamic motions. Using only the first frame of the rehearsal video as the rehearsal prior exacerbates this misalignment. Our RehearsalNeRF remains unaffected by such misalignments. Small mask Scene editing Big mask  Scene editing Rendering  Rendering 

Fig. 15 Results with various sizes of mask. The impact of the mask is marginal and our method robustly produce novel view and edited scene. (a) Mis -aligned rehearsal video   

> Rendering Rehearsal video Cam trajectory Scene editing
> Main w/o white light

(c ) Main stage video without white light  

> Rendering Rehearsal video Scene editing

(b ) Rehearsal video with different performer  

> Rendering Rehearsal video Main stage video Scene editing

(d ) Rehearsal video with different performer’s position  

> Rendering Rehearsal video Main stage video Scene editing

Fig. 16 Results with various rehearsal prior conditions. 

illumination vector vh. However, as demonstrated in Fig. 11, even if this assumption is violated, the challenge can be easily addressed by synthesizing the Rehearsal videos for each camera position on the main stage through novel view synthesis. 

Complex lighting effects In the hue initialization, the number of light sources determines the number of clusters in k-means clustering. This approach may seem ineffective in environments with a large number of light sources. However, the col-ors of the complex lighting can be represented by a few hue values. To verify this, we carry out the real-world experiment in scenes in front of a large LED screen whose resolution 3 , 360 × 1, 620 (5,443,200 light sources in total). As demonstrated in Fig. 13, RehearsalNeRF sufficiently represents these complex lighting effects by adjusting hyper-parameter k.18 Performance video input  Generated rehearsal prior  NVS rendering  Scene editing Fig. 17 Qualitative results for the generative rehearsal prior. We demonstrate our rehearsal-free pipeline using a generative rehearsal prior. The rehearsal images are generated from a single frame of the input video without any lighting effects. Our model operates effectively with the generated rehearsal prior without performance degradation. While the rehearsal prior is essential to our model, its accuracy does not need to be strict, nor does it have to be captured from real data. 

Mis-sync between main and rehearsal video The proposed real-world dataset consists of videos synchronized between the rehearsal stage and the main stage through the music. However, even when synchronization between the two stages is impossi-ble, RehearsalNeRF still operates effectively due to the regularization for dynamic objects (3.3). To demonstrate this, we present the rendering outcomes for rehearsal videos shifted by +30 and +60 frames in Fig. 14 and Tab. 5. We also evaluate our RehearsalNeRF using a rehearsal prior that consists solely of the first frame image of the rehearsal video. It is noticeable that our RehearsalNeRF consistently produces high-quality results, regardless of aligned motion. 

Quality of mask In Fig. 15, we report qualitative results with different mask size. The size of masks are modulated by erosion and dilatation operation. Our method shows stable novel view synthesis and scene editing quality, even with largely varying mask sizes. 

Rehearsal prior conditions To validate that our rehearsal prior does not require strict conditions, we conduct the following experiments, and they show plausible results in rendering and scene editing: (1) In Fig. 16 (a), we intentionally make a rehearsal video which is mis-aligned with the main stage video. To do this, we uti-lize 3D Gaussian splatting (Kerbl et al, 2023) to generate a video with an arbitrary pose; (2) In Fig. 16 (b), we use a rehearsal and main stage video whose performers are different. In addition, their clothes and motions are not identical. To handle this situa-tion, we modify Eq. 3 by simply multiplying a learnable variable by cS and cD before rendering to account for their brightness; (3) In Fig. 16 (c), we make the main stage video darker through a gamma correction. We simply multiply a learnable variable by cS and cD before rendering to account for their brightness. Since the white light changes the intensity of object’s radiance regardless of their own colors, the learnable variable could compensate the loss of the white light in the main stage; (3) In Fig. 16 (d), we show that our method works well in the extreme case where the performer’s pose and distance from the camera array are significant changed between the main and rehearsal stages. 

Generative rehearsal prior Although we propose and evaluate several strategies to relax this requirement, acquiring rehearsal data may still be challenging in practice. To address this issue more fundamentally, we further demonstrate that our algorithm can be applied using only the performance video by introducing a generative rehearsal prior. Specifically, we extract the first frame from the input video set (which contains 19 highly dynamic lighting effects) remove its illumination using a generative model, and use the resulting images as a rehearsal prior. Fig. 17 presents both the generative rehearsal prior and the results produced by our rehearsal-video-free model. We use the Nano Banana Pro model served from Google Gemini-3 Pro. Despite slight residual illu-mination artifacts and multi-view inconsistencies in the generated rehearsal prior, our model produces plausible results without noticeable performance degradation. These results highlight the strong potential of the generative rehearsal prior for improving the generalization of our proposed method. Importantly, although the rehearsal prior plays a crucial role in our model, it does not require high-fidelity accuracy and can be obtained from generated data rather than real captures. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present a novel approach that trains and renders neural fields for dynamic scenes captured under drastically changing illuminations. The proposed method decouples dynamic lighting effects from static/moving objects. For this, our key idea is to devise the rehearsal prior, which can be easily taken before turning on lights for the main stage. In addition, we leverage the light color-adaptive vectors and the semantic-aware regulerizations to jointly optimize neural fields for static/dynamic objects and varying illuminations. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method by showing impressive results on novel view synthesis and scene editing under dynamic illuminations. 

Limitation Directions for improvement exist. Since our work focuses on dynamic scene representations for short clips, efficient training schemes are needed for long sequence videos. 

Data Availability The authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available in the supplementary information files. These files include the source code, video demos, and consent forms for using the performers’ portraits in the datasets. Furthermore, the real-world datasets reported in the manuscript are available from the first authors on reasonable request. 

# Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by CJ Corporation. This work was also supported by the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evalua-tion (IITP) grants funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2020-II201361, No. RS-2024-00457882 and No.RS-2025-25441838, Development of a human foundation model for human-centric universal artificial intelligence and training of personnel) and the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT)(RS-2024-00338439). 

# Declarations 

Financial Interest: Changyeon Won, Hyunjun Jung and Seonmi Park received a Ph D stipend from Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST). Hae-Gon Jeon 20 received salaries from GIST. Jungu Cho and Chi-Hoon Lee received salaries from CJ Corporation. 

# Appendix A Application: Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy           

> Table A1 Similarity of input/output configurations between confocal fluorescence microscopy and RehearsalNeRF.
> Confocal fluorescence microscope RehearsalNeRF
> Illumination various wavelength LEDs/Lasers dynamic illuminations at a concert hall Sensor multiple detectors multiple cameras Subject live cells and tissues performers Output 3D volume rendering of live cells and tissues radiance fields for components of a scene

We demonstrate that our RehearsalNeRF can also be extended to other domains. As an example, we show a potential application to a confocal fluorescence microscope. Before describing the feasible scenario of our framework, we would like to introduce a concept of the confocal fluorescence microscope. The confocal fluorescence microscope is an optical microscope to scan cells and tissues and to be used for studying the properties of them. As the name suggests, the microscopes use the fluorescence to generate an image with much higher intensity light sources which excite fluorescent species in a sample of interest. And, the confocal flu-orescence microscope is devised to take higher resolutions and contrast images than that of the fluorescence microscope by blocking out-of-focus lights in image formula-tions. Capturing multiple 2D images at either different depths (Wang et al, 2021b) or various viewpoints (i.e. light field microscopy (Browning et al, 2022)) in a sam-ple enables 3D reconstruction and volume rendering of its structure. In particular, it becomes essential to investigate spatial arrangement of live cells and tissues with high precision in sciences, which is useful for assigning the localization to specific cellular compartments or finding out the relationships between them (Jonkman et al, 2020). In total, we claim that the system configuration, inputs and outputs of the con-focal fluorescence microscopes are very similar with those of our RehearsalNeRF as described in Tab. A1. Following this scenario of the confocal fluorescence microscope, we provide an example to demonstrate the potential application. In Hontani et al (2021), a set of images for a mouse brain captured using a fluorescence microscopy is available. Using the images, we first make a composite image and then project it onto a regular grid for the multiview image acquisition, which becomes the input of our RehearsalNeRF. By training RehearsalNeRF with these images, we can synthesize novel views of specific cells or entire of cells. As shown in Fig. A1, our RehearsalNeRF achieves the well-reconstructed spatial arrangement of the mouse brain. In the submitted video demo, we present rendering results that are synthesized by our RehearsalNeRF; please refer it. If this framework were extended to a temporal dataset consisting of flourescence 21 (b) Multi -view observation (a) Activation depending on the wavelengths  (c) Composite Rendering 

> Re hearsalNe RF

Fig. A1 Applying RehearsalNeRF framework to confocal fluorescence microscopy. (a) Each sample type exhibits different activations according to the wavelengths of exposed lights. (b) Through multi-view observation such as light field microscopy, we can generate multi view images which can be used to train RehearsalNeRF. (c) We can render the 3D volume of the subject. Please check our supplementary video. 

microscope images, it could lead to the discovery of many interesting properties of cells and tissues by expanding into 4D domain (3D + time). 

# Appendix B Diversity of Our Dataset 

Since the advent of NeRF, new datasets have been taken whenever new problems are defined. We collect a new dataset with dynamic scenes with changing illumination, a unique situation that has not been addressed before. Our dataset ensures the diversity with respect to the number of dancers, choreography, costumes, and backgrounds, compared to the public datasets for NeRFs, as reported in Tab. B2 and Fig. B2. As mentioned in the main manuscript, we also produce a synthetic dataset to test the robustness of our method for harder cases including intense light effects and highly saturated object surfaces. Furthermore, our dataset contains songs corresponding to the dances, which can be useful for multi-modal learning applications such as motion generation based on music. 

Fig. B2 Examples of main stage video in our dataset. The real-world dataset are sampled in the upper row and the synthetic dataset in the lower row. 

22 Table B2 Statistic of public datasets for NeRFs with dynamic motion and our dataset                       

> Dataset # of scenes # of dynamic subjects # of backgrounds Nerfies Validation Rig (Park et al, 2021a) 433Neural 3D video (Li et al, 2022b) 612Meet Room (Li et al, 2022a) 331Ours (real-world) 10 43Ours (synthetic) 444Frozen Motion
> Hue
> Original ,hue :24 0
> Hue:180
> Hue:120
> (a) Controllable light
> Frozen Light
> (b) Dynamic motions with the frozen lighting effect
> (c) Dynamic lighting effects with the frozen motion
> Hue :60

Fig. C3 Applications of RehearsalNeRF to video manipulation. (a) We can change the light colors after recording the video. (b) Our RehearsalNeRF produces the natural-looking dance video under artificially stopping the light effects. (c) We show a video with the frozen motion, but the light sources still work. Please check our supplementary video. 

# Appendix C More Experimental Results 

C.1 Video manipulation 

Accurate disentanglement of neural fields for dynamic illuminations and scene objects in the time domain can facilitate many applications. As examples, we show video editing applications such as time stop effect (a.k.a bullet-time) by manipulating the temporal flow of the decoupled neural fields. A controllable light effect that tunes light colors after taking the video is one of the applications of our RehearsalNeRF. Thanks to the accurate neural representation for dynamic lights, we can artificially direct the various light color effects in Fig. C3 (a). Another interesting application is to freeze the subject’s motion and light colors. As shown in Fig. C3 (b) and (c), since the illumination neural fields are supervised independently for the motion and geometry of the subject, we can easily produce the videos that show natural-looking motions in artificially fixed light conditions and vice versa. 

C.2 Analysis on synthetic dataset 

The synthetic dataset is designed to simulate high-intensity lighting setups, which can lead to texture degradation and color saturation in objects. This enables us to test our RehearsalNeRF in scenarios where real-world datasets cannot cover. In our experiments, we evaluate the performance of our model and compare it with the comparison methods under varying intensities of dynamic illumination. As depicted in 23 No lights  Low intensity lights  High intensity lights  Extreme intensity lights Fig. C4 Examples of synthetic datasets under various light intensities in dynamic illumination. From left to right, we incrementally increase the intensity of lights. The intensity predominantly used in our main paper corresponds to the ’high intensity’ setting, as shown in the third column. 

Fig. C4, we have created a synthetic dataset from no lighting to the extreme lighting conditions. We then assess the PSNR and SSIM values for novel view synthesis on the scene illustrated in Fig. C4. 21.98 21.54                                                                                                                  

> 20.12 19.01
> 23.75 23.33
> 22.067 21.48
> 17.36 17.21 16.33 15.71
> 11.42 10.97 11.04 10.67
> No lights Low intensity High intensity Extreme intensity
> K-planes Ours TensoIR VR Tensor PBR
> PSNR across dynamic objects PSNR across static objects PSNR across entire image
> 27.61 27.1 27.14 27.01
> 27.86
> 27.97 27.81
> 27.8
> 28.56 28.29 27.5
> 27.29
> 10.73 11.59
> 15.49 15.06
> No lights Low intensity High intensity Extreme intensity
> K-planes Ours TensoIR VR Tensor PBR
> 27.2 26.74 26.64
> 26.24
> 27.64 27.71 26.99 27.09
> 27.13 26.9 26.07 25.74
> 10.75 11.56
> 15.25 14.83
> No lights Low intensity High intensity Extreme intensity
> K-planes Ours TensoIR VR Tensor PBR
> 0.645 0.644 0.629 0.622
> 0.727 0.735 0.734 0.736
> 0.473 0.462 0.467 0.459
> 0.224 0.217 0.226 0.237
> No lights Low intensity High intensity Extreme intensity
> K-planes Ours TensoIR VR Tensor PBR
> SSIM across dynamic objects SSIM across static objects SSIM across entire image
> 0.706 0.707 0.698 0.68
> 0.725
> 0.722 0.721 0.727 0.737 0.734 0.715
> 0.715
> 0.537 0.555
> 0.622 0.614
> No lights Low intensity High intensity Extreme intensity
> K-planes Ours TensoIR VR Tensor PBR
> 0.704 0.704 0.696 0.69
> 0.725
> 0.723 0.722 0.727 0.728 0.725 0.707
> 0.707
> 0.526 0.544
> 0.61 0.601
> No lights Low intensity High intensity Extreme intensity
> K-planes Ours TensoIR VR Tensor PBR

Fig. C5 Quantitative results for the synthetic dataset under the lighting conditions with varying intensities. We evaluate the results across dynamic objects, static objects, and the entire image. 

In Figure C5, we present the results of novel view synthesis for only dynamic objects, only static objects and the entire image. We employ ground truth masks for this evaluation, and compare ours with K-planes (Fridovich-Keil et al, 2023) and TensorIR (Jin et al, 2023). Notably, the significant performance gap between our RehearsalNeRF and the other methods is observed when assessments are confined to dynamic objects. This implies that dynamic illumination significantly hinders learn-ing dynamic objects in neural fields. Moreover, the reason why our RehearsalNeRF exhibits the best performance on dynamic objects is that the Ldyn works well for the shapes of dynamic objects. This capability stems from the fact that the loss term leverages the rehearsal priors and optical flow, which provide coarse clues for shape reconstruction. The performance gap becomes noticeable as the intensity increases. This trend is consistent in the dynamic objects as well as both the static objects 24 Table D3 Comparison of computational efficiency. We report the peak GPU memory usage during inference, training time, and inference time measured on a single RTX 3090 GPU.                   

> Method VRAM (MB) Training Time (sec) Inference Time (sec)
> D2NeRF 3,739 16,406 72.10 K-Planes 1,081 10,491 7.93 TensoIR VR 2,449 27,110 3.54 TensoIR PBR 15,641 27,110 66.70
> Ours 1,639 32,250 14.80

and the entire image. In conclusion, our RehearsalNeRF is robust to handling intense lighting conditions as well. 

# Appendix D Computational resource 

We report runtime and resource analysis as your request in Tab. D3. For a fair com-parison, we standardize the batch size to 1024 rays and conduct all experiments on the synthetic dataset using a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. We report the peak GPU memory usage as measured by nvidia-smi . Our model exhibits a longer training time compared to other methods due to its architectural complexity. Addressing this limitation is left for future work. Possible directions include incorporating geometric priors or adopting more fast coordinate-based methods, such as Instant-NGP. 

# References 

Alldieck T, Xu H, Sminchisescu C (2021) imghum: Implicit generative models of 3d human shape and articulated pose. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Athar S, Xu Z, Sunkavalli K, et al (2022) Rignerf: Fully controllable neural 3d por-traits. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Barrow H, Tenenbaum J, Hanson A, et al (1978) Recovering intrinsic scene character-istics. Comput vis syst 2(3–26):2 Blanz V, Vetter T (1999) A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces. In: Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques Bojanowski P, Joulin A, Lopez-Paz D, et al (2018) Optimizing the latent space of generative networks. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) Boss M, Braun R, Jampani V, et al (2021a) Nerd: Neural reflectance decomposition from image collections. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) 25 Boss M, Jampani V, Braun R, et al (2021b) Neural-pil: Neural pre-integrated lighting for reflectance decomposition. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Boss M, Engelhardt A, Kar A, et al (2022) Samurai: Shape and material from unconstrained real-world arbitrary image collections. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Browning CM, Mayes S, Mayes SA, et al (2022) Microscopy is better in color: devel-opment of a streamlined spectral light path for real-time multiplex fluorescence microscopy. Biomedical Optics Express 13(7):3751–3772 Broxton M, Flynn J, Overbeck R, et al (2020) Immersive light field video with a layered mesh representation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 39(4):86–1 Chen Q, Koltun V (2013) A simple model for intrinsic image decomposition with depth cues. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Chen Z, Liu Z (2022) Relighting4d: Neural relightable human from videos. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Cheng HK, Tai YW, Tang CK (2021) Modular interactive video object segmentation: Interaction-to-mask, propagation and difference-aware fusion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Debevec P, Hawkins T, Tchou C, et al (2000) Acquiring the reflectance field of a human face. In: Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques El Helou M, Zhou R, Susstrunk S, et al (2021) Ntire 2021 depth guided image relighting challenge. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Fridovich-Keil S, Meanti G, Warburg F, et al (2023) K-planes: Explicit radiance fields in space, time, and appearance. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Gao C, Saraf A, Kopf J, et al (2021) Dynamic view synthesis from dynamic monocular video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Hontani Y, Xia F, Xu C (2021) Multicolor three-photon fluorescence imaging with single-wavelength excitation deep in mouse brain. Science advances 7(12):eabf3531 Horn BK (1974) Determining lightness from an image. Computer graphics and image processing 3(4):277–299 26 Jiang W, Yi KM, Samei G, et al (2022) Neuman: Neural human radiance field from a single video. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Jin H, Liu I, Xu P, et al (2023) Tensoir: Tensorial inverse rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Jonkman J, Brown CM, Wright GD, et al (2020) Tutorial: guidance for quantitative confocal microscopy. Nature protocols 15(5):1585–1611 Juliani A, Berges VP, Teng E, et al (2018) Unity: A general platform for intelligent agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:180902627 Kerbl B, Kopanas G, Leimkuehler T, et al (2023) 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. In: Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH Li L, Shen Z, Wang Z, et al (2022a) Streaming radiance fields for 3d video synthesis. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Li T, Slavcheva M, Zollhoefer M, et al (2022b) Neural 3d video synthesis from multi-view video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Li Z, Dekel T, Cole F, et al (2019) Learning the depths of moving people by watching frozen people. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Li Z, Niklaus S, Snavely N, et al (2021) Neural scene flow fields for space-time view synthesis of dynamic scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Li Z, Wang Q, Cole F, et al (2023) Dynibar: Neural dynamic image-based rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Liang Z, Zhang Q, Feng Y, et al (2023) Gs-ir: 3d gaussian splatting for inverse rendering. Arxiv 2311.16473 Ling J, Wang Z, Xu F (2023) Shadowneus: Neural sdf reconstruction by shadow ray supervision. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Loper M, Mahmood N, Romero J, et al (2015) Smpl: A skinned multi-person linear model. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 34(6):1–16 Lyu L, Tewari A, Leimk¨ uhler T, et al (2022) Neural radiance transfer fields for relightable novel-view synthesis with global illumination. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) 27 Maier R, Kim K, Cremers D, et al (2017) Intrinsic3d: High-quality 3d reconstruc-tion by joint appearance and geometry optimization with spatially-varying lighting. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Martin-Brualla R, Radwan N, Sajjadi MS, et al (2021) Nerf in the wild: Neural radi-ance fields for unconstrained photo collections. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Meka A, Zollh¨ ofer M, Richardt C, et al (2016) Live intrinsic video. In: Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH Mildenhall B, Srinivasan PP, Tancik M, et al (2020) NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Munkberg J, Hasselgren J, Shen T, et al (2022) Extracting triangular 3d models, materials, and lighting from images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Niemeyer M, Geiger A (2021) Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative neural feature fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Park K, Sinha U, Barron JT, et al (2021a) Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Park K, Sinha U, Hedman P, et al (2021b) Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional rep-resentation for topologically varying neural radiance fields. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40(6) Peng S, Zhang Y, Xu Y, et al (2021) Neural body: Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes for novel view synthesis of dynamic humans. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Phong BT (1975) Illumination for computer generated pictures. Communications of the ACM 18(6):311–317 Pumarola A, Corona E, Pons-Moll G, et al (2021) D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Sch¨ onberger JL, Frahm JM (2016) Structure-from-motion revisited. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 28 Schwarz K, Liao Y, Niemeyer M, et al (2020) Graf: Generative radiance fields for 3d-aware image synthesis. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Shi Y, Wu Y, Wu C, et al (2023) Gir: 3d gaussian inverse rendering for relightable scene factorization. Arxiv 2312.05133 Somanath G, Kurz D (2021) Hdr environment map estimation for real-time augmented reality. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Song L, Chen A, Li Z, et al (2023) Nerfplayer: A streamable dynamic scene represen-tation with decomposed neural radiance fields. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 29(5):2732–2742 Srinivasan PP, Deng B, Zhang X, et al (2021) Nerv: Neural reflectance and visi-bility fields for relighting and view synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Tancik M, Casser V, Yan X, et al (2022) Block-nerf: Scalable large scene neural view synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Teed Z, Deng J (2020) Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for optical flow. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) Tschernezki V, Larlus D, Vedaldi A (2021) Neuraldiff: Segmenting 3d objects that move in egocentric videos. In: 2021 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) Turki H, Ramanan D, Satyanarayanan M (2022) Mega-nerf: Scalable construction of large-scale nerfs for virtual fly-throughs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Wang C, Chai M, He M, et al (2022) Clip-nerf: Text-and-image driven manipulation of neural radiance fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Wang Z, Bovik AC, Sheikh HR, et al (2004) Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing (TIP) 13(4):600–612 Wang Z, Philion J, Fidler S, et al (2021a) Learning indoor inverse rendering with 3d spatially-varying lighting. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Wang Z, Zhu L, Zhang H, et al (2021b) Real-time volumetric reconstruction of bio-logical dynamics with light-field microscopy and deep learning. Nature methods 29 18(5):551–556 Weng CY, Curless B, Srinivasan PP, et al (2022) Humannerf: Free-viewpoint ren-dering of moving people from monocular video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Wu G, Yi T, Fang J, et al (2024) 4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Wu TW, Zhong F, Tagliasacchi A, et al (2022) D 2nerf: Self-supervised decoupling of dynamic and static objects from a monocular video. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Xian W, Huang JB, Kopf J, et al (2021) Space-time neural irradiance fields for free-viewpoint video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Xu H, Alldieck T, Sminchisescu C (2021) H-nerf: Neural radiance fields for rendering and temporal reconstruction of humans in motion. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Xu Z, Sunkavalli K, Hadap S, et al (2018) Deep image-based relighting from optimal sparse samples. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37(4):1–13 Yang W, Chen G, Chen C, et al (2022) S 3-nerf: Neural reflectance field from shading and shadow under a single viewpoint. In: Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Ye W, Chen S, Bao C, et al (2023) Intrinsicnerf: Learning intrinsic neural radi-ance fields for editable novel view synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp 339–351 Zeng C, Chen G, Dong Y, et al (2023) Relighting neural radiance fields with shadow and highlight hints. In: Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH Zhang B, Xu W, Zhu Z, et al (2023) Detachable novel views synthesis of dynamic scenes using distribution-driven neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:230100411 Zhang J, Liu X, Ye X, et al (2021a) Editable free-viewpoint video using a layered neural representation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40(4):1–18 Zhang K, Luan F, Wang Q, et al (2021b) PhySG: Inverse rendering with spherical gaussians for physics-based material editing and relighting. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Zhang K, Luan F, Li Z, et al (2022) Iron: Inverse rendering by optimizing neural sdfs and materials from photometric images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 30 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Zhang R, Tsai PS, Cryer JE, et al (1999) Shape-from-shading: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) 21(8):690–706 Zimmer H, Bruhn A, Weickert J (2011) Optic flow in harmony. International Journal on Computer Vision (IJCV) 93:368–388 31