Title: Resonance4D: Frequency-Domain Motion Supervision for Preset-Free Physical Parameter Learning in 4D Dynamic Physical Scene Simulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01994v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 01:04:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Resonance4D: Frequency-Domain Motion Supervision for Preset-Free Physical Parameter Learning in 4D Dynamic Physical Scene Simulation 

## Changshe Zhang 

zhangcs@stu.xidian.edu.cn Xidian University China 

## Jie Feng ∗

jiefeng0109@163.com Xidian University China 

## Siyu Chen 

chensy@ieee.org Jimei University China 

## Guanbin Li 

liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn Sun Yat-sen University China 

## Ronghua Shang 

rhshang@mail.xidian.edu.cn Xidian University China 

## Junpeng Zhang 

junpengzhang@xidian.du.cn Xidian University China 

Abstract 

Physics-driven 4D dynamic simulation from static 3D scenes re-mains constrained by an overlooked contradiction: reliable motion supervision often relies on online video diffusion or optical-flow pipelines whose computational cost exceeds that of the simulator itself. Existing methods further simplify inverse physical modeling by optimizing only partial material parameters, limiting realism in scenes with complex materials and dynamics. We present Reso-nance4D, a physics-driven 4D dynamic simulation framework that couples 3D Gaussian Splatting with the Material Point Method through lightweight yet physically expressive supervision. Our key insight is that dynamic consistency can be enforced without dense temporal generation by jointly constraining motion in comple-mentary domains. To this end, we introduce Dual-domain Motion Supervision (DMS), which combines spatial structural consistency for local deformation with frequency-domain spectral consistency for oscillatory and global dynamic patterns, substantially reducing training cost and memory overhead while preserving physically meaningful motion cues. To enable stable full-parameter physical re-covery, we further combine zero-shot text-prompted segmentation with simulation-guided initialization to automatically decompose Gaussians into object-part-level regions and support joint optimiza-tion of full material parameters. Experiments on both synthetic and real scenes show that Resonance4D achieves strong physical fidelity and motion consistency while reducing peak GPU memory from over 35 GB to around 20 GB, enabling high-fidelity physics-driven 4D simulation on a single consumer-grade GPU. 

CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Reconstruction ; Shape repre-sentations ; 3D imaging. 

Keywords 

Physics-based Simulation, Frequency-domain Motion Supervision, Dynamic 3D Gaussian Splatting 

1 Introduction 

Generating physically consistent dynamic responses from static 3D reconstructions is a core problem in world modeling[ 1], robotic 

> ∗Corresponding author.

interaction[ 25 ], and immersive content creation[ 9]. With the suc-cess of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) in efficient rendering and novel-view synthesis [ 11 ], recent research has begun to integrate explicit 3D representations with differentiable physics simulation, aiming to recover material parameters from visual observations and generate interactive 4D dynamic scenes. Among these approaches, modeling frameworks based on the Material Point Method [ 7] have attracted particular attention due to their ability to uniformly han-dle large deformations, complex contacts, and diverse material behaviors. However, existing methods often depend on supervi-sion strategies with high optimization overhead, while adopting simplified physical parameter settings that fall short of real-world material complexity. On the one hand, existing physics-driven 4D simulation meth-ods typically rely on online video diffusion models[ 8, 13 , 14 , 32 ]or optical flow networks[ 16 ] to enforce consistency between sim-ulated results and reference motions. Although such strategies offer effective temporal supervision, they typically depend on ad-ditional large-scale auxiliary models, resulting in substantial GPU memory and computational overhead and limiting their use in long-horizon settings and on consumer-grade hardware. More im-portantly, purely spatial frame-wise matching is often insufficient to reliably capture long-range temporal dependencies in complex non-rigid motion, making optimization prone to temporal discon-tinuities and inadequate recovery of high-frequency oscillatory details. Our experiments further indicate that effective motion su-pervision does not inherently depend on large-scale online prior models. For physics-driven dynamic fitting, lightweight supervi-sion that is more closely aligned with the underlying dynamics can still provide stable and competitive constraints, while substantially reducing optimization overhead. On the other hand, physical parameter modeling in existing methods remains limited. Real-world non-rigid objects are rarely materially uniform: different parts often exhibit distinct stiffness, compressibility, plasticity, and mass distribution, and their dynamic behaviors are jointly governed by multiple coupled physical pa-rameters. This characteristic has motivated recent physics-driven reconstruction methods to move beyond purely geometry-based motion fitting and incorporate explicit physical parameter optimiza-tion into dynamic modeling. However, as summarized in Table 1, 

> arXiv:2604.01994v1 [cs.CV] 2 Apr 2026

Zhang et al. (a) 𝒘 -𝒕 map . Given an input video, horizontal scanlines at a fixed height ℎ=232 are extracted from each frame and stacked over time to form a spatiotemporal 𝑤 -𝑡 slice. The horizontal and vertical axes correspond to width 𝑤 and time 𝑡 , respectively. This representation unfolds motion trajectories into a 2D pattern, making periodic motion and its frequency characteristics easier to observe.        

> =
> video -
> (c) Effect of density distribution on motion. A plausible part-level density distribution produces more natural swaying and restoring motion than uniform density.
> Leaf density: 30 Stem density: 280 Natural swaying and restoring motion
> Uniform density: 75 Sluggish and unnatural motion
> Oscillation  Deformation
> (b) 𝒘 -𝒕 analysis. Compared with deformation, oscillation exhibits a clearer periodic trajectory in the 𝑤 -𝑡 map, as highlighted by the red curve, together with a more pronounced dominant frequency peak.

Figure 1: Motivation for dual-domain motion analysis and part-level physical modeling. (a) By extracting horizontal scanlines at a fixed height and stacking them over time, an input video is converted into a 𝑤 − 𝑡 spatiotemporal slice that explicitly unfolds motion trajectories into a 2D structural pat-tern. (b) In this representation, oscillation exhibits a clearer periodic trajectory and a more pronounced dominant fre-quency peak than deformation. (c) Different density settings lead to markedly different motion behaviors: compared with uniform density, a more plausible part-level density distribu-tion produces more natural swaying and restoring motion. Table 1: Comparison of learnable physical parameters across different methods. A checkmark indicates that the corre-sponding parameter is explicitly optimized, while a blank entry indicates that it is not updated. Method Constitutive Parameters Physical Property                            

> Young’s Poisson’s Yield Plastic Friction Density Mod. Ratio Stress Visc. Angle PhysDreamer[32] ✓
> DreamPhysics[8] ✓
> Physics3D[14] ✓✓✓✓✓
> PhysFlow[16] ✓✓✓✓✓
> Ours ✓✓✓✓✓✓

most existing methods still optimize only a subset of physical param-eters while fixing the others as empirical constants. Such partial modeling restricts the ability to capture spatially varying mate-rial properties and the coupled mechanisms underlying real-world deformation. Moreover, the choice of parameter-sharing granular-ity introduces another challenge. Object-level sharing is often too coarse to represent heterogeneous materials across different parts, whereas particle-level optimization introduces excessive degrees of freedom and becomes highly under-constrained under limited-view supervision. These limitations suggest that accurate physical modeling requires both more complete parameter recovery and a more flexible part-level parameterization. To address the above issues, we propose Resonance4D, a physics-driven 4D dynamic simulation framework built upon 3DGS and MPM. The key idea is to eliminate the reliance on large online mod-els through lightweight yet complementary dual-domain supervi-sion, while improving the completeness and stability of material inversion via part-level full-parameter optimization. Specifically, we introduce Dual-domain Motion Supervision (DMS): in the spa-tial domain, structural consistency constraints are used to model slowly varying deformations; in the spatiotemporal frequency do-main, spectral consistency constraints are used to capture local oscillations and global dynamic patterns. This design eliminates the need to invoke online diffusion models or optical flow net-works during training, thereby significantly reducing optimization memory overhead while providing a complementary signal beyond frame-wise supervision for long-horizon dynamic fitting. To enable parameter optimization, we further establish a part-level differen-tiable optimization, in which material properties and constitutive parameters are jointly incorporated into end-to-end learning. To improve the practicality of this process in real scenes, we introduce two key designs. First, we adopt part-level parameter sharing to balance expressive power and optimization stability. Second, we employ simulation-driven automatic initialization, which selects more reasonable starting points through rapid candidate simula-tions and metric-based screening, thereby reducing the sensitivity of full-parameter optimization to initialization. To reduce manual annotation cost, we also introduce zero-shot segmentation-based part extraction to automatically construct parameter-sharing units. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: 

• Existing physics-driven 4D generation methods often rely on heavy online video priors for motion supervision, lead-ing to high memory and optimization cost. In contrast, our study shows that effective dynamic supervision can be achieved with lightweight constraints in the spatial and spectral domains. 

• Motivated by this observation, we propose Resonance4D, a unified physics-driven framework for 4D dynamic scene simulation with differentiable physical parameter learning from video observations. At its core, Dual-domain Motion Supervision (DMS) combines spatial structural consistency and spatiotemporal spectral consistency, removing the need for online diffusion or optical-flow models while reducing GPU memory overhead. 

• For complex real scenes, we further develop a part-level full-parameter differentiable optimization strategy. By jointly learning material properties and constitutive parameters, together with simulation-driven initialization and zero-shot segmentation-based part extraction, the framework im-proves the stability and accuracy of physical parameter inversion in heterogeneous scenes. Experiments on synthetic and real scenes demonstrate competitive performance in physical parameter recovery, motion consistency, and visual quality, while substantially lowering the hardware bar-rier. Resonance4D: Frequency-Domain Motion Supervision for Preset-Free Physical Parameter Learning in 4D Dynamic Physical Scene Simulation 

2 Related Work 2.1 3D/4D Scene Representation and Dynamic Reconstruction. 

Recovering renderable 3D scene representations from multi-view images or videos is a fundamental problem in visual computing. Early methods such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [ 20 ] model scene geometry and appearance with continuous implicit fields, while 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)[ 11 ] introduces an explicit Gaussian-based representation that offers favorable training ef-ficiency, rendering speed, and editability. These advances provide the foundation for dynamic scene modeling. Building on static 3D representations, a large body of work extends NeRF and 3DGS to dy-namic or 4D settings[ 18 , 21 – 23 , 27 ]. Methods such as D-NeRF[ 23 ], Nerfies[ 21 ], and HyperNeRF[ 22 ] model non-rigid scene dynamics through canonical spaces and learned deformation fields. More re-cent Gaussian-based approaches, including Dynamic 3D Gaussians [18 ] and 4D Gaussian Splatting[ 27 ], represent scene evolution using temporally varying Gaussian primitives or deformation trajecto-ries, achieving efficient and high-quality dynamic reconstruction and novel-view synthesis. However, these methods are primarily designed to reproduce observed time-varying geometry, appear-ance, and motion, rather than to infer the physical mechanisms or material parameters underlying the dynamics. 

2.2 Video Generation. 

Recent video generation has been dominated by diffusion-based and flow-matching models trained on large-scale video corpora. Representative methods such as Stable Video Diffusion[ 2] and VideoCrafter2[ 5] extend latent diffusion models to video generation through temporal modeling and staged training, while more recent systems such as CogVideoX[ 30 ] and Sora[ 15 ] further scale this line with diffusion-transformer architectures, leading to substan-tial improvements in visual fidelity, motion realism, and temporal coherence. In addition, recent flow-matching approaches, such as Pyramidal Flow Matching[ 10 ], improve generation efficiency by modeling video synthesis with unified spatial-temporal pyramids. In parallel, recent autoregressive video models, such as FAR[ 6] and LongLive[ 29 ], revisit causal next-frame generation and show strong potential for long-context or real-time video synthesis. Despite their strong generative capability, these methods model dynamics im-plicitly in latent spaces or neural generators, rather than through explicit physical states and interpretable material parameters. Nev-ertheless, the rich motion patterns learned by these models provide useful motion priors for physics-driven dynamic reconstruction and simulation. 

2.3 Physics-driven 3DGS. 

To improve physical consistency beyond purely appearance-driven dynamic modeling, recent work has begun to couple explicit scene representations with differentiable physics simulation. PhysGaus-sian is an early representative in this direction, integrating 3DGS with continuum mechanics and MPM simulation so that Gaussian primitives participate in both rendering and physical evolution[ 28 ]. Subsequent works further explore the use of learned video priors for physical parameter estimation and dynamic simulation. Phys-Dreamer leverages motion priors from video simulation models to animate static 3D objects under interaction[ 32 ]. DreamPhysics introduces video diffusion priors into physical attribute learning for 3D Gaussians and combines them with MPM-based simulation for 4D dynamic synthesis[ 8]. PhysFlow further incorporates video dif-fusion, multimodal foundation models, and flow-based constraints to strengthen dynamic supervision and parameter optimization[ 16 ]. Other methods, such as OmniPhysGS[ 13 ] and PhysSplat[ 33 ], con-tinue this direction by improving material modeling, scalability, or simulation efficiency. Despite encouraging progress, existing physics-driven 3DGS methods differ substantially in the form of supervision they require, the scope of physical parameters they op-timize, and the degree to which they rely on external initialization, region decomposition, or auxiliary modules. These differences are particularly important for real-scene parameter inversion, where optimization stability, supervision cost, and controllability are cen-tral concerns. 

3 Method 

Given a static 3D Gaussian scene, our goal is to recover physically meaningful material parameters and generate physically consistent 4D dynamics through explicit simulation. To this end, we propose a unified framework, illustrated in Figure 2, that tightly couples 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) with a differentiable Material Point Method (MPM) simulator. Our framework consists of three key components: dual-domain motion supervision for effective motion guidance, simulation-driven initialization for stabilizing optimization, and part-level joint physi-cal parameter optimization, where moving-part extraction is used to define parameter-sharing regions. Specifically, Section 3.1 presents Dual-domain Motion Supervision (DMS), which provides light-weight yet effective constraints in the spatial and spectral domains. Section 3.2 introduces a simulation-driven initialization strategy that improves optimization stability by selecting a more reliable starting point. Section 3.3 describes the part-level joint physical pa-rameter optimization framework, including moving-part extraction for defining parameter-sharing regions. 

3.1 Dual-domain Motion Supervision (DMS) 

A major challenge in physics-driven 4D simulation is how to pro-vide effective motion supervision without relying on heavy online teachers such as diffusion models or optical-flow networks during optimization. Purely spatial supervision is often sufficient for coarse appearance alignment, but it may be less sensitive to local oscil-latory motion patterns and fine-grained temporal inconsistencies. To address this issue, we complement spatial-domain supervision with a local spatiotemporal spectral loss. let V∗ = {I∗ 

> 𝑡

}𝑇 𝑡 =1 denote the reference video, and Let ˆV = {ˆI𝑡 }𝑇 𝑡 =1

denote the rendered video from the current simulation parameters, We first impose a spatial reconstruction loss on individual frames: 

Lspatial = 1 − 1

𝑇 

> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

SSIM (ˆI𝑡 , I∗ 

> 𝑡

), (1) Zhang et al. {"E": 54902.6946,          

> "nu": 0.0430, ......}
> {"E": 1168.5960,
> "nu": 0.0178, ......}
> {"E": 2671935.0046,
> "nu": 0.0683, ......}
> ...... ...... ......
> MPM Simulator
> Oscillation
> consistency
> Structural
> consistency
> Dual-domain motion supervision
> VLM
> Lifting
> Filter ["+leavs"]
> ["+stem"] Moving part
> Part-level Assignment
> “The alocasia
> is swaying in
> the wind.” Reference video
> Refenrence Video Generation
> Training
> Simulation-driven Initialization
> ℛ: Render
> 𝐀 : Simulate
> 𝐀 : Compare ℛ𝐀 𝐀
> ℛ

Figure 2: Resonance4D is a unified framework for physics-driven dynamic simulation from static reconstruction. Its key insight is that effective motion supervision does not require heavy online video priors; lightweight dual-domain spatial-spectral constraints are sufficient to guide physically meaningful dynamics. Guided by this insight, the framework first constructs a reference motion video, then identifies movable regions through automatic part-level assignment, next obtains a reliable starting point via simulation-driven initialization over the feasible physical parameter space, and finally performs part-level physical parameter optimization under Dual-domain Motion Supervision. 

This frame-wise spatial term provides stable structural supervision, but is less sensitive to local oscillatory motion and fine-grained temporal inconsistencies. Beyond frame-wise appearance similarity, we introduce spectral supervision on frame differences to capture local motion patterns. Specifically, we define the temporal difference sequences as 

ΔˆI𝑡 = ˆI𝑡 +1 − ˆI𝑡 , ΔI∗ 

> 𝑡

= I∗ 

> 𝑡 +1

− I∗ 

> 𝑡

, 𝑡 = 1, . . . ,𝑇 − 1. (2) Using frame differences suppresses static appearance cues and high-lights motion-dependent temporal variations, making the subse-quent spectral supervision more sensitive to local dynamic patterns. Object motion is often spatially localized and typically occupies only part of the image, while large background regions are static or only weakly varying. Directly applying a global 3D FFT to the entire video volume would therefore mix motion-relevant signals with irrelevant spatial content, making local dynamic patterns less distin-guishable in the frequency domain. To obtain more informative local spectra, we instead patchify the frame-difference volumes along the spatial dimensions before performing the Fourier transform. Specifically, after grayscale conversion, given ΔˆI ∈ R(𝑇 −1) × 𝐻 ×𝑊 

and ΔI∗ ∈ R(𝑇 −1) × 𝐻 ×𝑊 , the spatial dimensions are partitioned into non-overlapping patches of size 𝐻 𝑝 × 𝑊 𝑝 , yielding 

ˆP, P∗ ∈ R𝑁 × ( 𝑇 −1) × 𝐻 𝑝 ×𝑊 𝑝 , 𝑁 = 𝐻 𝐻 𝑝 

𝑊 𝑊 𝑝 

. (3) Each patch preserves the full temporal extent while restricting the spatial support to a local region. We then compute the 3D Fourier transform for each patch over the temporal and spatial axes 

ˆF𝑛 = F ( ˆP𝑛 ), F∗ 

> 𝑛

= F ( P∗ 

> 𝑛

), (4) where F (·) denotes the discrete Fourier transform over (𝑡, ℎ, 𝑤 ).We decompose each spectrum into magnitude and phase-related components. The magnitude term aligns the spectral energy distri-bution of local dynamic patterns 

Lmag = log (1 + | ˆF𝑛 |) − log (1 + | F∗ 

> 𝑛

|) 1 . (5) To further enforce local spectral alignment, we introduce a phase consistency term. We first normalize each complex spectrum as 

˜F𝑛 = ˆF𝑛 

| ˆF𝑛 | + 𝜖 , ˜F∗ 

> 𝑛

= F∗

> 𝑛

|F∗ 

> 𝑛

| + 𝜖 , (6) where 𝜖 is a small constant for numerical stability. The phase simi-larity map is then defined as 

S(𝑛 ) 

> phase

= Re 

 ˜F𝑛 ⊙ ˜F∗

> 𝑛



, (7) with ⊙ denoting element-wise multiplication. The corresponding phase loss is 

Lphase = 1 − mean 



S(𝑛 )

> phase



, (8) where mean (·) averages over all elements of the phase similarity tensor. Finally, the spectral supervision term and the full dual-domain motion supervision are defined as 

Lspec = Lmag + L phase , LDMS = Lspatial + L spec . (9) 

3.2 Simulation-driven Initialization 

Joint optimization over multiple physical parameters is highly sen-sitive to initialization, since different parameter combinations may induce substantially different motion patterns while yielding sim-ilarly plausible frame-wise appearances. Instead of directly start-ing from a single hand-crafted guess, we first perform a coarse simulation-driven search to obtain a more reliable initialization. Resonance4D: Frequency-Domain Motion Supervision for Preset-Free Physical Parameter Learning in 4D Dynamic Physical Scene Simulation 

Physical parameters often span several orders of magnitude. For example, Young’s modulus may vary from 10 3 to 10 7, making linear sampling inefficient. We therefore perform Latin hypercube sam-pling (LHS) in log space. Let the valid range of the 𝑗 -th parameter be [𝑙 𝑗 , 𝑢 𝑗 ], and let 𝐷 be the number of optimized parameters. We sample u𝑛 ∼ LHS ([ 0, 1]𝐷 , 𝑁 ) and map each sample to the physical parameter space as: 

𝑠 𝑛,𝑗 = log 10 𝑙 𝑗 +  log 10 𝑢 𝑗 − log 10 𝑙 𝑗 

 𝑢 𝑛,𝑗 , 𝜃 (𝑛 ) 

> 𝑗

= 10 𝑠 𝑛,𝑗 , (10) where 𝑁 is the number of sampled candidates. For each candidate parameter vector 𝜽 (𝑛 ) , we run a short forward MPM simulation for 𝐾 frames and render the corresponding video 

ˆV𝑛 . We then select the parameter vector whose rendered motion is most similar to the reference video under a lightweight video similarity metric: 

𝜽 ∗ = arg max   

> 𝜽 (𝑛 )

MS -SSIM ( ˆV𝑛 , V∗). (11) The selected parameter vector 𝜽 ∗ is used to initialize the subsequent differentiable optimization. 

3.3 Part-level Joint Physical Parameter Optimization 

A key challenge in physical parameter inversion is to choose an appropriate parameter-sharing granularity. Object-level parame-terization is often too coarse to capture spatially heterogeneous material properties, whereas particle-level optimization is typically under-constrained under limited visual supervision and thus prone to instability. To balance expressiveness and optimization stability, we perform joint physical parameter optimization at the part level. Concretely, this module consists of two stages. We first derive sta-ble part-level assignments from multi-view observations without manual annotation, which define the parameter-sharing units for subsequent inversion. We then associate each part with a learnable physical parameter vector and optimize these parameters under mo-tion supervision, starting from the simulation-driven initialization described above. 

Part-level Assignment. We obtain part-level assignments auto-matically from zero-shot text-prompted segmentation on the input multi-view images using DINOv3 [ 24 ] and SAM3 [ 4], producing 2D semantic masks for each view. We then lift these 2D segmentation results to the 3D Gaussian representation following LUDVIG [ 19 ]. Specifically, for each Gaussian, we aggregate its category responses across views and apply a softmax function to estimate the probabil-ity of belonging to each part category, assigning the most likely label accordingly. Finally, we apply a KNN-based post-processing step to suppress isolated noisy points and improve local label consistency. The resulting stable part assignments are used in the subsequent pa-rameter optimization. Detailed implementation of the full pipeline is provided in the supplementary material. 

Physical Parameter Optimization. Given the part-level assign-ments, we associate each part with a learnable physical parameter vector. Suppose the scene is decomposed into 𝑀 parts, and each part is assigned a physical parameter vector. In our implementation, these parameters include both constitutive parameters and material attributes, such as Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio, yield stress, plastic viscosity, internal friction angle, and density. Let 𝜽 𝑚 ∈ R𝐾 

> +

denote the physical parameter vector of the 𝑚 -th part, where 𝐾 is the number of optimized physical quantities, and let 𝜽 ∗ 

> 𝑚

denote its initialized value obtained from the simulation-driven initialization stage. To enforce positivity and improve optimization stability, we op-timize the parameters in the log domain. Specifically, we introduce an unconstrained trainable variable 𝝃 𝑚 ∈ R𝐾 for each part and initialize it as 

𝝃 (0) 

> 𝑚

= log  max (𝜽 ∗

> 𝑚

, 𝜀 ), (12) where log (·) and max (· , 𝜀 ) are applied element-wise, and 𝜀 is a small positive constant for numerical stability. During optimization, we first clamp 𝝃 𝑚 to the feasible log-domain range and then recover the physical parameters by 

𝝃 𝑚 ← clip  𝝃 𝑚 , log  max (l, 𝜀 ), log  max (u, 𝜀 ) , (13) 

𝜽 𝑚 = exp (𝝃 𝑚 ), (14) where l, u ∈ R𝐾 denote the lower and upper bounds of the physical parameters, respectively, and exp (·) is also applied element-wise. The resulting part-level parameters are assigned to all particles belonging to the corresponding part and are then used by the differ-entiable MPM simulator. Starting from the initialized parameters, we unroll the MPM simulator and differentiable renderer, and op-timize the log-domain variables by minimizing the dual-domain motion supervision: 

min  

> {𝝃 𝑚 }𝑀 𝑚 =1

LDMS 

 {𝜽 𝑚 }𝑀 𝑚 =1

, 𝜽 𝑚 = exp (𝝃 𝑚 ). (15) After the simulator computes gradients with respect to the physical parameters, the gradients are propagated back to the log-domain variables through the chain rule 

𝜕 L

𝜕 𝝃 𝑚 

= 𝜕 L

𝜕 𝜽 𝑚 

⊙ 𝜽 𝑚 , (16) where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. The trainable log-domain variables {𝝃 𝑚 }𝑀 𝑚 =1 are then updated using AdamW[ 17 ]. At each optimization step, the current 𝝃 𝑚 is first mapped to the physical parameters through Eq. (14) , and the resulting gradients are back-propagated to 𝝃 𝑚 for parameter update. For additional stability, we clip the gradients of the trainable log-domain variables during optimization. In summary, the optimization proceeds as: 

{𝜽 ∗ 

> 𝑚

}𝑀 𝑚 =1 → { 𝝃 (0) 

> 𝑚

}𝑀 𝑚 =1 → { 𝜽 𝑚 }𝑀 𝑚 =1 → ˆV → L DMS ( ˆV, V∗),

Starting from the initialized part-level parameters {𝜽 ∗ 

> 𝑚

}𝑀 𝑚 =1, we initialize the log-domain variables {𝝃 (0) 

> 𝑚

}𝑀 𝑚 =1, recover the physi-cal parameters {𝜽 𝑚 }𝑀 𝑚 =1, and optimize them through differentiable simulation and rendering under the dual-domain motion super-vision loss LDMS ( ˆV, V∗). Overall, this formulation enables stable optimization of part-level physical parameters under limited-view visual supervision. 

4 Experiments 

In this section, we evaluate Resonance4D on both real-world and synthetic benchmarks. We first present results on real data to assess its ability to capture realistic motion and physical behaviors from visual observations (Sec. 4.2). We then perform further evaluation on synthetic scenes, which enables more comprehensive qualitative Zhang et al. 

Table 2: Quantitative comparison on four scenes from the PhysDreamer dataset. We report video fidelity metrics, including MS-SSIM, PSNR, and LPIPS, together with peak GPU memory usage. The column “all” denotes the average results over all four scenes. Best results are highlighted in bold, respectively.                                                                                                                                       

> Method Proc. & Year Alocasia Carnations Hat Telephone All MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓Memory ↓MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓Memory ↓MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓Memory ↓MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓Memory ↓MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓Memory ↓
> DreamPhysics AAAI2025 0.8143 18.52 0.3904 32.21 0.7458 17.55 0.2199 34.12 0.5068 14.69 0.2118 33.06 0.7886 21.18 0.5117 34.27 0.7139 17.98 0.3334 33.42 Physics3D -0.6807 16.89 0.4236 31.53 0.6715 17.05 0.1964 33.91 0.5057 14.75 0.1970 32.85 0.7929 20.94 0.4011 33.94 0.6627 17.41 0.3046 33.06 PhysFlow CVPR2025 0.5785 15.60 0.4874 38.38 0.6448 16.03 0.2460 38.53 0.5091 14.76 0.2004 36.68 0.7996 21.07 0.3943 40.48 0.6330 16.87 0.3320 38.52 Ours -0.7958 18.40 0.3958 22.32 0.7900 19.21 0.1257 22.14 0.5109 14.80 0.1966 21.65 0.8325 21.82 0.4246 20.97 0.7323 18.56 0.2857 21.77 DreamPhysics Physic3D PhysFlow Ours RealWorld
> t=0.66 t=1.32 t=1.98 t=2.64
> DreamPhysics Physic3D PhysFlow Ours RealWorld
> t=2.97 t=3.3 t=3.63
> t=0.66 t=1.32 t=1.98 t=2.64 t=2.97 t=3.3 t=3.63

Figure 3: Visual comparison on four scenes from the PhysDreamer dataset. For each method, we show representative video frames, the motion-region ww-tt visualization, and the corresponding FFT spectrum. The 𝑤 -𝑡 maps reveal temporal motion patterns along a fixed spatial coordinate, while the FFT plots further characterize their frequency responses. In the carnations 

scene, our method better preserves the oscillatory motion property, producing clearer periodic patterns and frequency peaks that are closer to the real-world reference. In the telephone scene, our method achieves the closest alignment with the real-world motion in both the spatiotemporal trajectory and the spectral distribution. 

and quantitative comparisons (Sec. 4.3). Finally, we conduct ablation studies to analyze the effectiveness of the key design choices in our framework (Sec. 4.4). More visualizations and detailed analyses are provided in the appendix. 

4.1 Experiments Details 

Datasets We conduct experiments on both real-world and syn-thetic datasets. For real-world evaluation, we adopt four scenes from the PhysDreamer Dataset[ 32 ]: telephone , carnations , alocasia ,and hat . Each scene contains a captured motion video together with its corresponding reconstructed 3D Gaussian representation, pro-viding a suitable testbed for evaluating physics-driven parameter Resonance4D: Frequency-Domain Motion Supervision for Preset-Free Physical Parameter Learning in 4D Dynamic Physical Scene Simulation 

optimization under realistic appearance variations and complex motion dynamics. For synthetic evaluation, we use four scenes from the PAC-NeRF Dataset[ 12 ], including bird , cat , and toothpaste .In addition to rendered observations, PAC-NeRF provides simu-lated point-wise motion trajectories, enabling more detailed and systematic evaluation of recovered dynamic behaviors. 

Metrics For real-world evaluation, we measure the discrepancy between the rendered videos and the captured videos using MS-SSIM[ 26 ], PSNR, and LPIPS[ 31 ]. These metrics assess reconstruc-tion quality from structural, pixel-wise, and perceptual perspectives, respectively. For synthetic evaluation, we compare the simulated moving points with the ground-truth trajectories using Chamfer Distance (CD), 95th percentile Hausdorff Distance (HD95), and F-score to assess the geometric accuracy of the recovered dynamics. 

Baselines For the PhysDreamer dataset, we compare our method with representative approaches that are compatible with our exper-imental setting and provide complete training pipelines, including DreamPhysics, Physics3D, and PhysFlow. These baselines reflect different levels of physical modeling complexity: DreamPhysics fo-cuses on optimizing a single physical property, Physics3D supports joint optimization of multiple physical parameters, and PhysFlow further considers multi-material scenes with multiple physical prop-erties. A more detailed comparison is provided in Tab.1. For the PAC-NeRF dataset, we use PAC-NeRF and PhysFlow as baselines. We exclude GIC[ 3 ] and MASIV[ 34 ] from the comparison, since both methods further refine the 3D Gaussian representation after physi-cal parameter optimization. This additional geometry optimization changes the problem setting and therefore prevents a strictly fair comparison with our target task. 

Implementation Details We use the official implementations of all baseline methods and follow their default training settings whenever applicable. For fair comparison, all rendered videos are exported at 30 FPS during evaluation, and all experiments are per-formed on a single NVIDIA L20 GPU with 48GB memory. For both the PhysDreamer and PAC-NeRF datasets, we use the reconstructed 3D Gaussian scenes released by PhysFlow. For PhysDreamer dataset, we further use the manually separated moving parts provided in the same release. 

4.2 Results on the PhysDreamer Real-World Dataset 

We first evaluate Resonance4D on the PhysDreamer real-world benchmark, which contains four challenging scenes with diverse motion patterns and appearance variations. Quantitative results are reported in Table 2, where we compare with representative physics-driven 3DGS baselines using PSNR, MS-SSIM, LPIPS, and peak GPU memory. Overall, Resonance4D delivers the strongest overall performance across all four scenes, achieving 0.7323 MS-SSIM, 18.56 PSNR, and 0.2857 LPIPS, with only 21.77,GB peak GPU memory. Compared with DreamPhysics, the most competitive baseline, it improves the average PSNR by 0.58,dB and reduces LPIPS from 0.3334 to 0.2857, while using substantially less memory during optimization. This suggests that high-quality dynamic reconstruction does not require heavy online priors: lightweight dual-domain motion supervision 

Table 3: Quantitative comparison on the PAC-NeRF dataset. We report CD, HD95, and F-score. Best results are highlighted in bold.                 

> Method Proc. & Year CD ↓HD95 ↓F-score ↑
> PAC-NeRF ICLR 2023 0.0074 0.1013 0.4329
> PhysFlow CVPR 2025 0.0085 0.1113 0.3647 Ours -0.0063 0.0914 0.4256

can already provide effective guidance at a much lower computa-tional cost. Resonance4D also consistently outperforms Physics3D and PhysFlow in both reconstruction quality and efficiency, demon-strating a more favorable balance between fidelity and optimization overhead. Resonance4D shows the clearest advantage on carnations and 

telephone . On carnations , it achieves the best results on all three image-based metrics, and the recovered motion is more closely aligned with the ground-truth temporal behavior. On telephone ,it attains the highest MS-SSIM and PSNR, while the dominant frequency peak is closer to that of the real-world reference. To-gether, these results suggest that Resonance4D improves not only frame-wise appearance, but also the fidelity of underlying motion dynamics. Overall, the results on the PhysDreamer benchmark show that lightweight dual-domain motion supervision is sufficient to recover realistic and physically plausible motion in real-world scenes, while significantly reducing the optimization memory cost compared with prior methods. 

4.3 Results on the PAC-NeRF Synthetic Dataset 

Table3 reports the quantitative results on the PAC-NeRF benchmark. Overall, our method achieves competitive performance against rep-resentative physics-driven baselines. Specifically, it obtains the best CD and HD95, improving them to 0.0063 and 0.0914, respectively, which indicates more accurate geometric alignment and smaller worst-case deviation from the ground truth. In terms of F-score, our method reaches 0.4256, which is slightly lower than PAC-NeRF but remains at a comparable level. These results suggest that our method is broadly on par with mainstream approaches on this benchmark, while showing an advantage in geometric accuracy. Figure 4 further provides qualitative comparisons on the bird and 

toothpaste scenes at consecutive time steps. In the relatively stiff 

bird scene, our results remain closer to the ground truth in overall shape evolution, while PAC-NeRF tends to produce overly soft de-formation and PhysFlow exhibits a somewhat rigid response. In the softer toothpaste scene, our method also better matches the ground-truth temporal evolution, whereas PhysFlow shows an unnatural rebound in shape change that is inconsistent with the reference. Combined with the quantitative results, these visualizations indi-cate that our method can recover material-dependent dynamics in a stable and plausible manner, yielding competitive performance across different motion regimes. Overall, our method remains competitive with mainstream ap-proaches on PAC-NeRF. Zhang et al. GT Ours PhysFlow PAC -Nerf 

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison on the bird and toothpaste 

scenes at consecutive time steps. The bird scene corresponds to relatively stiff material behavior, while toothpaste exhibits softer dynamics. Our method better matches the material-dependent motion in both cases. PAC-NeRF tends to produce overly soft deformation in the stiff bird scene, whereas Phys-Flow is overly rigid. In the toothpaste scene, PhysFlow shows an unnatural rebound in shape evolution, which deviates from the ground truth. 

4.4 Ablation 

We perform ablation studies on four scenes from the PhysDreamer dataset to examine the effectiveness of the major components in our framework. All ablation variants are evaluated under a uni-fied setting using three image-space metrics: MS-SSIM, PSNR, and LPIPS. The study covers four aspects, including Dual-domain Mo-tion Supervision, simulation-driven initialization, parameter update granularity, and density optimization. Additional results on moving-part extraction are deferred to the appendix. 

Ablation on Dual-domain Motion Supervision. We evaluate different combinations of spatial-domain and frequency-domain supervision, including L1, SSIM, and FFT-based spectral supervi-sion. The results are reported in Table 4. Using only spatial super-vision already produces reasonable reconstruction quality, while replacing L1 with SSIM brings consistent improvements, indicat-ing that structural similarity provides a stronger appearance-level constraint. Further introducing FFT-based frequency-domain su-pervision leads to the best performance on all three metrics. This suggests that spectral supervision provides complementary motion cues beyond spatial appearance matching, and helps better capture local dynamic patterns. Overall, these results verify that the pro-posed dual-domain motion supervision achieves a more effective balance between appearance alignment and motion modeling. 

Ablation on Simulation-driven Initialization. We evaluate the proposed simulation-driven initialization. Because joint optimiza-tion of coupled physical parameters is highly sensitive to initial-ization, poor starting points can lead to unstable convergence or inferior local optima. Table 5 shows that simulation-driven initializa-tion consistently improves the final results over simpler baselines, indicating that coarse candidate selection provides a useful prior for subsequent optimization. Although it introduces extra offline cost, this cost is incurred only once and remains lighter than relying on heavy online teachers throughout training. 

Table 4: Ablation study on dual-domain motion supervision. We compare different combinations of spatial-domain and frequency-domain supervision.                      

> Spatial Domain Frequency Domain Metrics L1 SSIM FFT MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> ✓0.7268 18.4173 0.2913
> ✓0.7284 18.4463 0.2899
> ✓✓0.7304 18.5486 0.2885
> ✓✓0.7323 18.5570 0.2857

Table 5: Ablation study on initialization strategies. We com-pare GPT-based initialization and simulation-driven initial-ization, both before and after optimization, and also report the average time cost of simulation-driven initialization.                

> Method MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> GPT Init. 0.6273 16.8943 0.3866 GPT Init. + Training 0.6272 16.8653 0.3852 Sampling Init. 0.7296 18.4854 0.2886 Sampling Init. + Training 0.7323 18.5570 0.2857
> Avg. sampling init. time : 14.0 min Four scenes, 1080P, 32 videos, 16 frames.

Table 6: Ablation study on parameter update granularity. We compare particle-level, object-level, and part-level updates.            

> MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> Particle Update 0.7241 18.2771 0.2935 Object Update 0.7269 18.4318 0.2909 Part Update 0.7323 18.5570 0.2857

Table 7: Effect of density optimization in the proposed frame-work.         

> MS-SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> W/O density Update 0.7099 17.9778 0.3020 With density Update 0.7323 18.5570 0.2857

Ablation on Parameter Update Granularity. We compare object-level, particle-level, and part-level parameter optimization. Table 6 shows that object-level updates are too coarse for heterogeneous materials, while particle-level updates are unstable under limited supervision. Part-level optimization achieves the best overall per-formance, providing a better balance between expressiveness and stability. 

Ablation on Density Optimization. A key difference between Resonance4D and several previous methods is that we jointly opti-mize not only constitutive parameters but also material attributes such as density. To evaluate the impact of density optimization, we compare variants with and without density in Table 7. The re-sults in Table 7 show that optimizing density leads to consistent improvements. This suggests that fixing density as a constant can limit the expressiveness of the physical model, especially when the target dynamics depend on both constitutive behavior and mass-related properties. Jointly optimizing density therefore improves the completeness of parameter fitting and leads to more accurate dynamic reconstruction. Resonance4D: Frequency-Domain Motion Supervision for Preset-Free Physical Parameter Learning in 4D Dynamic Physical Scene Simulation 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented a physics-driven dynamic generation framework based on 3D Gaussians for recovering part-level physi-cal parameters from visual observations and synthesizing plausible motion. Through dual-domain motion supervision, our method provides a more direct and lightweight dynamic constraint for physical parameter optimization, in contrast to heavy online mo-tion priors. Experimental results show that the proposed approach achieves more stable parameter recovery and produces more natu-ral dynamic motion. The current framework still relies on relatively complete reconstruction and lacks high-level feedback from vision-language models; future work will extend it to sparse-view settings and incorporate vision-language model feedback to further improve dynamic modeling performance. 

Acknowledgments 

To Robert, for the bagels and explaining CMYK and color spaces. 

References 

[1] Jad Abou-Chakra, Krishan Rana, Feras Dayoub, and Niko Sünderhauf. 2024. Physically embodied gaussian splatting: A realtime correctable world model for robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10788 (2024). [2] Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et al . 2023. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15127 (2023). [3] Junhao Cai, Yuji Yang, Weihao Yuan, Yisheng He, Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, Hui Cheng, and Qifeng Chen. 2024. Gic: Gaussian-informed continuum for physical property identification and simulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 75035–75063. [4] Nicolas Carion, Laura Gustafson, Yuan-Ting Hu, Shoubhik Debnath, Ronghang Hu, Didac Suris, Chaitanya Ryali, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Haitham Khedr, An-drew Huang, et al . 2025. Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 (2025). [5] Haoxin Chen, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Menghan Xia, Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, and Ying Shan. 2024. Videocrafter2: Overcoming data limitations for high-quality video diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 7310–7320. [6] Yuchao Gu, Weijia Mao, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2025. Long-context autoregressive video modeling with next-frame prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19325 

(2025). [7] Yuanming Hu, Yu Fang, Ziheng Ge, Ziyin Qu, Yixin Zhu, Andre Pradhana, and Chenfanfu Jiang. 2018. A moving least squares material point method with displacement discontinuity and two-way rigid body coupling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37, 4 (2018), 1–14. [8] Tianyu Huang, Haoze Zhang, Yihan Zeng, Zhilu Zhang, Hui Li, Wangmeng Zuo, and Rynson WH Lau. 2025. Dreamphysics: Learning physics-based 3d dynamics with video diffusion priors. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 39. 3733–3741. [9] Yuheng Jiang, Zhehao Shen, Yu Hong, Chengcheng Guo, Yize Wu, Yingliang Zhang, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. 2024. Robust dual gaussian splatting for immersive human-centric volumetric videos. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 43, 6 (2024), 1–15. [10] Yang Jin, Zhicheng Sun, Ningyuan Li, Kun Xu, Hao Jiang, Nan Zhuang, Quzhe Huang, Yang Song, Yadong Mu, and Zhouchen Lin. 2024. Pyramidal flow match-ing for efficient video generative modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05954 

(2024). [11] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, George Drettakis, et al .2023. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4 (2023), 139–1. [12] Xuan Li, Yi-Ling Qiao, Peter Yichen Chen, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Ming Lin, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Chuang Gan. 2023. Pac-nerf: Physics augmented continuum neural radiance fields for geometry-agnostic system identification. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05512 (2023). [13] Yuchen Lin, Chenguo Lin, Jianjin Xu, and Yadong Mu. 2025. Omniphysgs: 3d constitutive gaussians for general physics-based dynamics generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18982 (2025). [14] Fangfu Liu, Hanyang Wang, Shunyu Yao, Shengjun Zhang, Jie Zhou, and Yueqi Duan. 2024. Physics3d: Learning physical properties of 3d gaussians via video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04338 (2024). [15] Yixin Liu, Kai Zhang, Yuan Li, Zhiling Yan, Chujie Gao, Ruoxi Chen, Zhengqing Yuan, Yue Huang, Hanchi Sun, Jianfeng Gao, et al . 2024. Sora: A review on background, technology, limitations, and opportunities of large vision models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17177 (2024). [16] Zhuoman Liu, Weicai Ye, Yan Luximon, Pengfei Wan, and Di Zhang. 2025. Un-leashing the potential of multi-modal foundation models and video diffusion for 4d dynamic physical scene simulation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 11016–11025. [17] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2017. Decoupled weight decay regularization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 (2017). [18] Jonathon Luiten, Georgios Kopanas, Bastian Leibe, and Deva Ramanan. 2024. Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking by persistent dynamic view synthesis. In 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) . IEEE, 800–809. [19] Juliette Marrie, Romain Ménégaux, Michael Arbel, Diane Larlus, and Julien Mairal. 2025. Ludvig: Learning-free uplifting of 2d visual features to gaussian splatting scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 7440–7450. [20] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2021. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commun. ACM 65, 1 (2021), 99–106. [21] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Gold-man, Steven M Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. 2021. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision . 5865–5874. [22] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M Seitz. 2021. Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for topologically varying neu-ral radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13228 (2021). [23] Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. 2021. D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 10318–10327. [24] Oriane Siméoni, Huy V Vo, Maximilian Seitzer, Federico Baldassarre, Maxime Oquab, Cijo Jose, Vasil Khalidov, Marc Szafraniec, Seungeun Yi, Michaël Rama-monjisoa, et al. 2025. Dinov3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 (2025). [25] Wei-Cheng Tseng, Ellina Zhang, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, and Florian Shkurti. 2025. Gaussian Splatting Visual MPC for Granular Media Manipulation. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 3176–3182. [26] Zhou Wang, Eero P Simoncelli, and Alan C Bovik. 2003. Multiscale structural similarity for image quality assessment. In The thrity-seventh asilomar conference on signals, systems & computers, 2003 , Vol. 2. Ieee, 1398–1402. [27] Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang. 2024. 4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 20310–20320. [28] Tianyi Xie, Zeshun Zong, Yuxing Qiu, Xuan Li, Yutao Feng, Yin Yang, and Chen-fanfu Jiang. 2024. Physgaussian: Physics-integrated 3d gaussians for generative dynamics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 4389–4398. [29] Shuai Yang, Wei Huang, Ruihang Chu, Yicheng Xiao, Yuyang Zhao, Xianbang Wang, Muyang Li, Enze Xie, Yingcong Chen, Yao Lu, et al . 2025. Longlive: Real-time interactive long video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22622 

(2025). [30] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al . 2024. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 (2024). [31] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. 2018. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition .586–595. [32] Tianyuan Zhang, Hong-Xing Yu, Rundi Wu, Brandon Y Feng, Changxi Zheng, Noah Snavely, Jiajun Wu, and William T Freeman. 2024. Physdreamer: Physics-based interaction with 3d objects via video generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 388–406. [33] Haoyu Zhao, Hao Wang, Xingyue Zhao, Hao Fei, Hongqiu Wang, Chengjiang Long, and Hua Zou. 2025. PhysSplat: Efficient Physics Simulation for 3D Scenes via MLLM-Guided Gaussian Splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision . 5242–5252. [34] Yizhou Zhao, Haoyu Chen, Chunjiang Liu, Zhenyang Li, Charles Herrmann, Junhwa Hur, Yinxiao Li, Ming-Hsuan Yang, Bhiksha Raj, and Min Xu. 2025. Toward Material-Agnostic System Identification from Videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 5944–5956.