Title: SACHA: Semantic-Aware Compression for 3D Gaussian Head Avatars

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.23133v1

Published Time: Tue, 25 Aug 2026 01:58:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# SACHA: Semantic-Aware Compression for 3D Gaussian Head Avatars 

Zihan Zhang 1, Shanzhi Yin 1, Xinju Wu 1, Bolin Chen 2, Ru-Ling Liao 2, Jie Chen 2, Shiqi Wang 1∗,Yan Ye 2

> 1

City University of Hong Kong 2DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 

Abstract 

Animatable 3D Gaussian head avatars offer high-fidelity and flexible facial rendering, but typically require substantial stor-age and transmission costs for numerous Gaussian primitives. Existing Gaussian head avatar methods overlook the visual saliency of different head semantic regions for more appro-priate Gaussian primitive allocation, as well as the efficient compression of trained head avatar sequences. To tackle this obstacle, we propose SACHA, a dynamic head avatar com-pression framework that leverages both semantic-aware den-sity control and appearance-motion decomposition to achieve compact representation and high-quality novel-view render-ing of head avatar sequences. Specifically, the semantic-aware density control guides the adaptive allocation of Gaussian primitives across different head regions with region-adaptive densification and pruning. In addition, the appearance-motion decomposed compression further reduces the temporal redun-dancy of the avatar sequence by transmitting only head-prior parameters for avatar movements. Together, these designs en-able a compact representation for efficient transmission of dynamic Gaussian head avatars while preserving visual fi-delity. Experiments demonstrate that SACHA achieves a supe-rior rate-distortion performance over existing Gaussian head avatar representation and compression methods while main-taining high-quality novel-view and novel-expression render-ing. 

Introduction 

Photorealistic and animatable 3D head avatars have become increasingly important for immersive applications, such as telepresence, virtual reality, remote collaboration, and inter-active digital human systems. To support realistic and in-teractive user experience, these avatars are expected to pro-vide not only high-fidelity appearance reconstruction but also controllable facial expressions, head motions, and real-time rendering capability. Early 3D head avatar methods primar-ily relied on parametric mesh-based representations (Blanz and Vetter 1999; Weise et al. 2011) to model facial identity and motion. Later neural-based approaches (Lombardi et al. 2018) combined explicit geometric proxies with learned dy-namics and view-dependent appearance to improve render-ing fidelity. However, their modeling capabilities are limited by predefined mesh geometry, low-dimensional deformation 

> ∗

Corresponding author. 

Figure 1: An example of Gaussian reallocation with semantic-aware density control on a specific sequence (Sub-ject 264 from NeRSemble dataset). spaces, and constrained appearance, making it difficult to capture complex geometry and fine appearance details. Re-cent advances in neural rendering, from implicit neural repre-sentations like Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) to explicit representations based on 3D Gaus-sian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023), have substantially improved the realism and rendering efficiency of 3D head reconstruction. In addition, recent 3DGS head avatar meth-ods (Giebenhain et al. 2024; Qian et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2025a; Sun et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2025b; Lee et al. 2026; Song, Cui, and Zhang 2026) have integrated head-prior para-metric models, such as Faces Learned with an Articulated Model and Expressions (FLAME) (Li et al. 2017) and Neural Parametric Head Models (NPHM) (Giebenhain et al. 2023), to facilitate animation of a canonical head representation and enable flexible control over facial dynamics and head poses. Despite the remarkable progress in head avatar techniques, efficient representation of animatable 3DGS head avatars remains challenging. Preserving fine facial appearance and expression details typically requires a large number of Gaus-sian primitives, which significantly increases the storage and transmission burden. Existing 3DGS compression tech-niques utilize pruning, quantization, entropy coding, and compact attribute representations (Fan et al. 2024; Nieder-mayr, Stumpfegger, and Westermann 2024; Liu et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2026) to reduce the repre-arXiv:2608.23133v1 [cs.MM] 24 Aug 2026 Figure 2: Overview of the semantic-aware canonical Gaussian training pipeline. sentation size for 3DGS scenes while preserving rendering quality. These methods are primarily designed for general 3D scenes and typically rely on primitive-level statistics or reconstruction errors to identify redundancy, largely over-looking the structural and semantic priors that are inherent to head avatars. Specifically, head avatars can be naturally partitioned into multiple semantically meaningful regions, as shown in Fig-ure 1. These regions differ substantially in visual complex-ity and deformation intensity. Regions such as the eyes and mouth exhibit finer appearance details and undergo more significant variations with facial expressions, thus requiring denser Gaussian representations. In contrast, smoother and relatively static regions, such as the neck, can be represented with fewer Gaussian primitives. This motivates a semantic-aware allocation of Gaussian representational capacity rather than global allocation based on a single criterion. However, most of the current 3DGS head avatar methods directly in-herit the density control scheme from the vanilla 3DGS optimization pipeline (Kerbl et al. 2023), where gradient-based densification and attribute-based pruning are indis-criminately implemented on each primitive. This ignores the variation in visual saliency across different head regions, causing potential inefficiency and unnecessary redundancy for 3DGS head avatar compression. To address these limitations, we propose “SACHA”, a semantic-aware compression framework for 3D Gaussian head avatars. The proposed SACHA leverages a sequence-wise canonical Gaussian asset and frame-wise head-prior parameters to build an efficient and animatable framework. It further learns per-Gaussian perceptual sensitivity through additional supervision and associates the sensitivity with the semantic regions provided by the head-prior model to guide region-adaptive densification and pruning. Specifically, a region-wise modulator is derived from the learned relative sensitivity of each head region to adjust the densification threshold and pruning ratio during the iterative density con-trol according to regional representation demands. To accu-rately evaluate the perceptual rendering contribution during region-adaptive pruning, both primitive-level and pixel-level sensitivities are considered with a perceptual-score-based Gaussian sorting. This semantic-aware density control pro-motes a more effective allocation of Gaussian primitives, as shown in Figure 1. It encourages refinement in regions with fine visual structures or substantial expression varia-tions while enabling more aggressive Gaussian removal in relatively smooth and less dynamic regions, leading to a favorable rate-distortion (RD) trade-off for dynamic head avatar coding. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose a head-prior-guided semantic-aware com-pression framework for dynamic Gaussian head avatars that enables appearance-motion decomposition and semantic-aware Gaussian density control. 

• We develop a region-adaptive densification strategy with a proposed region-wise modulator that aggregates learned perceptual sensitivities within semantic regions and adap-tively adjusts region-specific densification thresholds for Gaussian growth. 

• We design a region-adaptive pruning strategy with a ded-icated perceptual importance score for primitive-level Gaussian importance evaluation and further employ the proposed region-wise modulator to adaptively adjust pruning ratios across different semantic regions, thereby enabling region-adaptive and perceptually guided Gaus-sian pruning. 

• We conduct comprehensive comparisons with dynamic head avatar representation methods, as well as conven-tional and learning-based dynamic 3DGS compression methods, and experiment results demonstrate that the pro-posed method achieves favorable rendering quality with substantially reduced representation sizes. Figure 3: Overview of the proposed appearance-motion de-composed compression framework for 3D Gaussian head avatars. 

Proposed Method 

Framework Overview 

Our proposed SACHA is designed to achieve compact rep-resentation and efficient transmission of dynamic Gaussian head avatars. To this end, we factorize each dynamic avatar sequence into two complementary components: a sequence-wise canonical Gaussian representation that preserves the head appearance and identity, and frame-wise head-prior pa-rameters that model temporal motion and expression varia-tions. Building on this formulation, the following two subsec-tions describe how we learn compact canonical head Gaus-sian primitives with semantic-aware density control as de-tailed in Figure 2 and how we further perform appearance-motion decomposed compression for efficient transmission and reconstruction as illustrated in Figure 3. 

Semantic-Aware Canonical Gaussian Training. We op-timize the canonical Gaussians G = {gi}Ni=1 , where each primitive has geometric attributes, appearance attributes and a learnable perceptual sensitivity attribute, 

gi = ( μi, ri, si, α i, hi, a i). (1) The attributes μi, ri, si, αi, and hi represent the posi-tion, rotation, scale, opacity, and spherical harmonic coeffi-cients, respectively, and ai represents the learned perceptual sensitivity. During training, these canonical Gaussians are transformed into frame-wise dynamic global Gaussians for rendering through head-prior-guided deformation. Specifi-cally, following GaussianAvatars (Qian et al. 2024), we adopt FLAME (Li et al. 2017) as the head-prior model and bind each Gaussian gi to a mesh triangle indexed by bi, with its geometric attributes defined in the local coordinate system of the bound triangle. For frame t, the head-prior parameters deform the mesh, from which the scale factor kbi,t , rotation matrix Rbi,t , and translation vector Tbi,t of the bound trian-gle are computed to obtain the frame-wise global geometric attributes: 

μ′ 

> i,t

= kbi,t Rbi,t μi + Tbi,t ,

r′ 

> i,t

= Rbi,t ri, s′ 

> i,t

= kbi,t si. (2) Accordingly, the dynamic global Gaussian at frame t is 

g′ 

> i,t

= ( μ′

> i,t

, r′

> i,t

, s′

> i,t

, α i, hi, a i). (3) These dynamic Gaussians are then rendered through a dual-branch rendering scheme comprising an RGB rendering branch and an auxiliary sensitivity map branch (Zhou and Ni 2025), thereby enabling joint optimization of Gaussian geometric attributes, appearance attributes, and per-Gaussian perceptual sensitivities. Specifically, μ′

> i,t

, r′

> i,t

, s′

> i,t

, α i, hi are used for RGB rendering while ai is used for sensitivity map rendering, and they share the alpha-compositing weights. We aggregate the learned sensitivities of Gaussians within each semantic region to obtain region-level sensitivities that guide region-adaptive densification and pruning during training, yielding a compact set of canonical Gaussians for subsequent sequence compression. 

Appearance-Motion Decomposed Compression. After training, the head-prior model can be utilized for compact dynamic representation of the head avatar sequence (Yin et al. 2026; Tang et al. 2025). As illustrated in Figure 3, the avatar appearance is represented by canonical Gaussians and only needs to be transmitted once with the binding indices, while temporal variations are driven by per-frame head-prior parameters from the FLAME model. At the encoder side, the canonical Gaussians are com-pressed using an off-the-shelf conventional codec (Sandri et al. 2024). To prevent potential mismatches between the decoded canonical Gaussians and their corresponding bound triangles due to the Gaussian re-ordering during the coding process, we establish a deterministic Gaussian order based on the quantized coordinates. Before encoding, the canoni-cal Gaussians are sorted lexicographically according to their quantized (x, y, z ) coordinates, and the corresponding bind-ing indices are rearranged following the same ordering. The resulting indices sequence is then remapped using a dictio-nary and compressed losslessly. For head-prior parameters, they are divided into static parameters shared across the se-quence and dynamic parameters that vary over frames. Both of them are quantized and encoded using Context-Adaptive Binary Arithmetic Coding (CABAC), where the static com-ponents are coded only once and the dynamic components are coded frame by frame. At the decoder side, the canonical Gaussian attributes, binding indices, and head-prior parameters are decoded from their respective bitstreams. The decoded canonical Gaus-sians are reordered using the same coordinate-based rule and paired with the sequence of decoded indices, thereby restor-ing the Gaussian-to-triangle correspondence. For each tar-get frame, the decoded canonical Gaussians are transformed into frame-wise global dynamic Gaussians through head-prior-guided deformation using the recovered bindings and decoded head-prior parameters. The resulting Gaussians are then rendered to reconstruct the multi-view dynamic head videos. 

Semantic-Aware Density Control 

To obtain a compact canonical representation, we perform semantic-aware density control during training, adaptively allocating more Gaussians to perceptually important head regions and fewer to less important ones. Instead of treating all canonical Gaussians uniformly (Kerbl et al. 2023), we exploit semantic assignments from the head-prior model to distinguish head regions and learned perceptual sensitivities to guide Gaussian allocation and selection, enabling region-adaptive densification and pruning. 

Region-Adaptive Densification. Region-adaptive densifi-cation controls Gaussian growth by adjusting the densifi-cation threshold for each semantic region. To define these semantic regions, we divide the FLAME mesh into eight re-gions according to the official FLAME masks, including the mouth, eyes, nose, ears, boundary, scalp, neck and face, as vi-sualized in Figure 1. We denote the resulting set of semantic regions by R.Since each canonical Gaussian gi is bound to a triangle of the FLAME mesh indexed by bi, it inherits the semantic label of its bound triangle. The subset of canonical Gaussians associated with region R ∈ R is then defined as: 

GR = {gi ∈ G | ℓ(bi) = R} , (4) where ℓ(bi) ∈ R denotes the semantic label of the FLAME triangle indexed by bi.For each region R, we first compute the region-level per-ceptual sensitivity as: 

¯aR = 1

|G R|

X

> gi∈G R

ai, (5) where ai is the learned perceptual sensitivity of Gaussian 

gi, and |G R| denotes the number of Gaussians in region R.Similarly, the global-level perceptual sensitivity is computed as: 

¯aglobal = 1

|G| 

X

> gi∈G

ai, (6) where |G| denotes the total number of canonical Gaussians. Based on the above sensitivity measurements, we introduce a region-wise modulator mR to adjust the densification thresh-old: 

mR = ¯aglobal 

¯aR

, (7) The threshold τR for region R is then computed as: 

τR =



τmin , τ0mR < τ min 

τmax , τ0mR > τ max 

τ0mR, otherwise, 

(8) where τ0 denotes the initial densification threshold shared by all regions, and τmin and τmax denote the lower and upper predefined bounds of τR, respectively. For regions with sen-sitivity higher than the global one, mR < 1 will be obtained to lower the densification threshold, encouraging Gaussian cloning or splitting. In contrast, less sensitive regions will have mR > 1 to prevent unnecessary densification. The lower and upper bounds prevent excessive threshold modu-lation and stabilize the region-adaptive densification process. 

Region-Adaptive Pruning. In addition to region-adaptive densification, pruning can further improve compactness by removing redundant primitives while maintaining expres-siveness. Following the same intuition, we leverage the region-wise modulator mR to adapt the pruning ratio for each semantic region, resulting in a region-adaptive pruning strategy. Specifically, we define the pruning ratio for region 

R as: 

ρR =



ρmin , ρ0mR < ρ min 

ρmax , ρ0mR > ρ max 

ρ0mR, otherwise, 

(9) where ρ0 is a predefined pruning ratio, and ρmin and ρmax 

denote its lower and upper bounds, respectively. Regions with larger mR values are assigned higher pruning ratios for more aggressive pruning, while regions with smaller mR values receive lower pruning ratios to preserve more primitives. While the region-specific pruning ratio only determines the number of Gaussians to be removed within each se-mantic region, it does not indicate which specific primi-tives to eliminate. To properly identify the redundant Gaus-sians in a semantic-aware manner, we design a perceptual importance score that further integrates visual sensitivity into Gaussian importance evaluation. Building on the im-portance measure of LightGaussian (Fan et al. 2024), we further incorporate both the reference sensitivity maps S

and learned per-Gaussian sensitivities ai, while retaining the accumulated multi-view alpha-blending contribution and the volume-aware factor. Let V denote the set of training views and Ωv denote the pixel domain of view v. For each view v ∈ V , let Svp

denote the reference sensitivity value at pixel p ∈ Ωv . The perceptual importance score qi of Gaussian gi is defined as: 

qi =

X

> v∈V

X

> p∈Ωv

wvi,p 

 1 + λS Svp

 (1 + λaai) γi, (10) where wvi,p denotes the alpha-blending weight of Gaussian 

gi at pixel p in view v, and the volume-aware factor γi is computed as: 

γi =



min 

 Vi

V90 

, 1

 0.1

, Vi = 43 πs i, 1si, 2si, 3, (11) where (si, 1, s i, 2, s i, 3) are the three components of si, and V90 

denotes the 90th percentile of all Gaussian volumes. Specif-ically, the reference sensitivity Svp reweights the projected contribution of Gaussian gi according to the local perceptual structure at pixel p in view v, while ai modulates its accumu-lated multi-view contribution according to the Gaussian-level sensitivity learned during training. The coefficients λS and 

λa control the contributions of the pixel-level reference sen-sitivity and learned Gaussian-level sensitivity, respectively. With the region-specific pruning ratio and proposed per-ceptual importance score, pruning is performed indepen-dently within each semantic region. For region R, qi ranks Gaussians according to their perceptual contributions, while 

ρR determines how many Gaussians are removed from that region. Accordingly, the Gaussians in GR are sorted in as-cending order according to their qi, and the lowest-scoring 

⌊ρR|G R|⌋ Gaussians are removed. Together with region-adaptive densification, this forms a semantic-aware grow-and-prune cycle: region-adaptive den-sification facilitates refinement in regions with stronger per-ceptual sensitivity, while region-adaptive pruning preferen-tially removes low-scoring Gaussians according to region-specific pruning ratios, producing a more compact set of canonical Gaussians while preserving perceptually sensitive facial structures. 

Optimization 

The 3DGS head avatar is trained by jointly optimizing ren-dering fidelity, perceptual sensitivity estimation, and Gaus-sian regularization. Following GaussianAvatars (Qian et al. 2024), the rendered RGB images are supervised using a com-bination of an L1 term and a D-SSIM term: 

Lrgb = (1 − λ)L1 + λLD-SSIM . (12) We also employ the position and scale regularization terms 

Lpos and Lscale from GaussianAvatars. The per-Gaussian sensitivities are learned by supervising the rendered sensi-tivity map ˆS with the reference sensitivity map S, which is generated from the ground-truth RGB images following Perceptual-GS (Zhou and Ni 2025). The sensitivity loss is formulated as: 

Lsens = BCE( ˆS, S ). (13) The overall training objective is: 

L = Lrgb + λsens Lsens + λpos Lpos + λscale Lscale . (14) The optimization consists of a warm-up stage followed by a region-adaptive density control stage. During warm-up, the modulators mR are fixed at 1, such that all regions use the same densification threshold, and region-adaptive pruning is disabled. This stage stabilizes the optimization of the canon-ical Gaussian attributes and per-Gaussian sensitivities. Af-ter warm-up, the region-level perceptual sensitivities ¯aR are periodically recomputed and used to update the modulator 

mR, region-adaptive densification thresholds τR, and region-adaptive pruning ratios ρR. Region-adaptive densification is then performed at regular intervals, while region-adaptive pruning is periodically applied according to the perceptual importance score qi and the corresponding region-specific pruning ratios ρR.

Experimental Results 

Experimental Settings 

Datasets. We conduct experiments on the NeRSemble dataset (Kirschstein et al. 2023), which provides synchro-nized multi-view facial videos captured from 16 calibrated viewpoints. 10 subjects are selected (074, 104, 165, 218, 253, 264, 302, 304, 306, and 460) in the experiments. All images are downsampled to a resolution of 802 × 550 pixels. We consider two evaluation settings: novel-view synthesis and novel-expression synthesis. For each subject, the model is trained using 15 of the 16 viewpoints, with one complete expression sequence additionally excluded from all train-ing viewpoints. For novel-view synthesis, we evaluate 100 frames per subject from the held-out viewpoint, which cover diverse facial expressions across the 10 subjects. For novel-expression synthesis, we evaluate 100 frames per subject from the held-out expression sequence across all 16 view-points, where different held-out expressions are selected for different subjects to cover diverse unseen expressions. 

Implementation Details. The proposed method is imple-mented in PyTorch, and all experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090D GPU. For each sub-ject, the model is independently optimized for 360,000 it-erations using the Adam optimizer. Unless otherwise speci-fied, the Gaussian representation, FLAME binding, render-ing settings, and reconstruction-related loss weights follow GaussianAvatars (Qian et al. 2024). The optimization starts with a warm-up stage, where the first 110,000 iterations are performed using global density control. Then, the proposed region-adaptive densification and pruning strategies are ac-tivated. During this stage, the region-level sensitivities ¯aR

and global-level sensitivities ¯aglobal are recalibrated every 

Tcalib = 50 ,000 iterations, followed by the recalculation of region-wise modulator mR, region-specific densification thresholds τR, and pruning ratios ρR. The base densification threshold and pruning ratio are set to τ0 = 3 × 10 −4 and 

ρ0 = 0 .2, respectively. The sensitivity loss weight and the learning rate of the perceptual sensitivity parameters are set to 1 × 10 −2 and 1 × 10 −4, respectively. After training, the canonical Gaussian asset is compressed using GeS-TM (Sandri et al. 2024) with four compression levels. The reported representation size includes all data re-quired for reconstruction, including the compressed canoni-cal Gaussian asset, Gaussian-to-triangle binding indices, and FLAME parameters, and is measured in megabytes (MB). We evaluate reconstruction quality using Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) (Wang et al. 2004), and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) (Zhang et al. 2018). We also use the RD curves to compare the compression performances. 

Comparison Methods. We compare the proposed method with four representative dynamic head avatar methods, in-cluding GaussianAvatars (GA) (Qian et al. 2024), Tenso-rialGA (TGA) (Wang et al. 2025b), TexAvatars (Lee et al. 2026), and SVG-Head (Sun et al. 2025). Since these methods do not support variable-rate compression, they are reported at their respective native operating points. In addition, we consider three compression-oriented meth-ods. Two of them are selected from Joint Exploration Exper-iment 6.2 between WG 4, WG 5 and WG 7 of the Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) (WG 07 MPEG 3D Graphics Coding and Haptics Coding 2025), including a point-cloud-compression (PCC)-based method with G-PCC (Fujii et al. 2024) codec and a video-based method (Li, Liao, and Yu 2025) with High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) (Sullivan et al. 2012). We also compare the proposed method with CompactSTG (Lee et al. 2024), a learning-based dynamic 3DGS compression method. For the G-PCC- and HEVC-based methods, we train frame-by-frame sequences by in-dependently optimizing each frame as a static 3DGS rep-resentation for 2,000 iterations and generate multiple rate points by varying the corresponding quantization parame-ters. For CompactSTG, the entire sequence is modeled as a dynamic scene and optimized for 25,000 iterations with different mask-loss weights used to control the pruning ratio. For novel-view synthesis, we compare with all applicable methods on the same test frames, while novel-expression 1 2 325.800 26.800 27.800 28.800 29.800 30.800                   

> PSNR
> 515 25
> MB
> 65 85 105 1230.885 0.895 0.905 0.915 0.925 0.935
> SSIM
> 515 25
> MB
> 65 85 105 1230.000 0.040 0.080 0.120 0.160 0.200
> LPIPS
> 515 25
> MB
> 65 85 105
> GPCC (MPEG-GSC) HEVC (MPEG-GSC) CompactSTG (CVPR 2024) GA (CVPR 2024) TGA (CVPR 2025) SVG-Head (ICCV 2025) TexAvatars (3DV 2026) SACHA (Ours) GPCC (MPEG-GSC) HEVC (MPEG-GSC) CompactSTG (CVPR 2024) GA (CVPR 2024) TGA (CVPR 2025) SVG-Head (ICCV 2025) TexAvatars (3DV 2026) SACHA (Ours) GPCC (MPEG-GSC) HEVC (MPEG-GSC) CompactSTG (CVPR 2024) GA (CVPR 2024) TGA (CVPR 2025) SVG-Head (ICCV 2025) TexAvatars (3DV 2026) SACHA (Ours)

Figure 4: Rate-distortion performance comparisons for novel-view synthesis in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. 

(a) Subject 074 

(b) Subject 264 

Figure 5: Subjective comparisons with G-PCC, HEVC, CompactSTG, GA, SVG-Head, TexAvatars, and TGA on subjects 074 and 264 from the NeRSemble dataset. comparisons are limited to four dynamic head avatar methods that support expression-driven synthesis. 

Performance Comparisons 

Rate-Distortion Performances of Novel-View Synthesis. 

The RD performance of the proposed method compared with the comparison methods in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS for novel-view synthesis is shown in Figure 4. It can be observed that the proposed method achieves fa-vorable RD performance across the three evaluation metrics, particularly within the low bit-rate under 5 MB. Specifically, CompactSTG operates within a similar bit-rate range, but its RD performance is less competitive than that of the pro-posed method, especially in terms of PSNR and LPIPS. The G-PCC- and HEVC-based methods achieve a higher recon-struction quality at their highest-rate points because each frame is independently optimized. However, such frame-by-frame representations require substantially larger represen-tation sizes around 10 MB, and their reconstruction quality degrades significantly at lower rates. In contrast, the proposed method reduces temporal redun-dancy through the shared canonical Gaussian asset and com-pact head-prior parameters, and further reduces the redun-dancy of the canonical asset through semantic-aware density control, thereby achieving better reconstruction quality at much lower rates. For compared head avatar representation methods, although some of them achieve higher reconstruc-tion quality, they require considerably larger representation sizes more than 20 MB. 

Subjective Comparisons of Novel-View Synthesis. The subjective comparisons of proposed method and comparison methods are shown in Figure 5. With similar objective qual-ity, the proposed method requires the smallest representation size while producing more visually pleasing results. Specif-ically, CompactSTG tends to over-smooth fine facial struc-tures, whereas G-PCC and HEVC introduce more noticeable distortions and color inconsistencies around the facial fea-tures, hair, and head boundaries. In contrast, the proposed method better preserves facial appearance and local details at a substantially lower rate. For GA, SVG-Head, and TexA-vatars, they achieve similar subjective quality as the proposed method but require considerably larger representation sizes, while TGA is more compact but exhibits more noticeable over-smoothing around facial features. Method Size (MB) PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓

GA (Qian et al. 2024) 100.08 25.5097 0.9102 0.1103 TGA (Wang et al. 2025b) 21.78 25.8089 0.9125 0.1364 TexAvatars (Lee et al. 2026) 69.67 26.5422 0.9087 0.0596 SVG-Head (Sun et al. 2025) 84.99 24.9033 0.9010 0.1270 

SACHA (Ours) 2.83 25.4799 0.9103 0.1202 

Table 1: Quantitative comparisons for novel-expression syn-thesis in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. 

Novel-Expression Synthesis. Table 1 presents the novel-expression synthesis performance comparison with dynamic head avatar methods. The proposed method is evaluated us-ing its highest-quality compression setting. Despite its sub-stantially smaller representation size, our method achieves competitive reconstruction quality compared with exist-ing head avatar representations. Specifically, it outperforms SVG-Head in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS, while achieving results comparable to GA and TGA. TexAvatars obtains the best PSNR and LPIPS among the compared meth-ods but under-performs the proposed method in terms of SSIM. These results indicate that the proposed method gen-eralizes well to unseen facial expressions and maintains com-petitive reconstruction quality across different viewpoints. 

Ablation Study 

We conduct ablation experiments to evaluate the effective-ness of region-adaptive densification, the proposed percep-tual importance score, and region-adaptive pruning. All ab-lation variants and their corresponding RD results are shown in Figure 6. Default denotes the vanilla 3DGS configura-tion, which uses a single global densification threshold and opacity-based pruning. RAD and RAP denote region-adaptive densification and region-adaptive pruning, respectively. GP 

denotes global pruning with a fixed pruning ratio for all re-gions, while LGS and PIS denote the pruning score proposed in LightGaussian (Fan et al. 2024) and the perceptual impor-tance score proposed in our method, respectively. 

Effectiveness of Region-Adaptive Densification. To eval-uate the effectiveness of region-adaptive densification, we compare Default and RAD under vanilla 3DGS pruning strat-egy. Default applies a single densification threshold to all Gaussian primitives, whereas RAD adaptively adjusts the region-specific thresholds according to region-level percep-tual sensitivity. As shown in Figure 6, RAD achieves better RD performance than Default , demonstrating that region-adaptive densification enables a more effective allocation of Gaussian primitives. 

Effectiveness of the Proposed Perceptual Importance Score. To evaluate the effectiveness of proposed perceptual importance score, we compare the fixed-ratio pruning with importance score proposed in LightGaussian (Fan et al. 2024) and our proposed perceptual importance score, denoted as 

RAD + GP w/ LGS and RAD + GP w/ PIS , respectively. As shown in Figure 6, at comparable rates, the proposed percep-tual importance score brings clear improvements in PSNR 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5         

> MB
> 28.300 28.520 28.740 28.960 29.180
> PSNR
> Default RAD RAD + GP w/ LGS RAD + GP w/ PIS RAD + RAP w/ PIS (Ours)
> 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5
> MB
> 0.916 0.918 0.920 0.922 0.924
> SSIM
> Default RAD RAD + GP w/ LGS RAD + GP w/ PIS RAD + RAP w/ PIS (Ours)
> 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5
> MB
> 0.107 0.111 0.115 0.119 0.123
> LPIPS
> Default RAD RAD + GP w/ LGS RAD + GP w/ PIS RAD + RAP w/ PIS (Ours)

Figure 6: Rate-distortion performance comparisons for novel-view synthesis of the ablation variants in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. and SSIM with the same pruning ratio. These results show that incorporating both pixel-level reference sensitivity and learned Gaussian-level sensitivity provides a more reliable ranking of primitives for pruning. 

Effectiveness of Region-Adaptive Pruning. Finally, we evaluate the effectiveness of region-adaptive pruning by com-paring it to fixed-ratio pruning with perceptual importance score, denoted as RAD + GP w/ PIS and RAD + RAP w/ PIS , respectively. As shown in Figure 6, RAD + RAP w/ PIS achieves a more favorable RD performance than RAD + GP w/ PIS across all three evaluation metrics. These results demonstrate that, by applying a distinct pruning ratio for each semantic region, a more appropriate Gaussian removal can be achieved across different head regions. 

Regional Qualitative Analysis. We compare Default + GP w/ PIS with RAD + RAP w/ PIS to assess how semantic-aware density control affects Gaussian allocation and lo-cal reconstruction quality. Both variants use the proposed perceptual importance score for pruning and differ only in whether semantic regions are used to adapt the densifica-tion thresholds and pruning ratios. For Subject 264, Figure 1 shows that semantic-aware density control allocates more Gaussians to regions with fine visual structures while reduc-ing redundant primitives in smoother regions. This realloca-tion reduces the total Gaussian count while improving local reconstruction quality in both the ear and mouth regions. 

Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose SACHA, a semantic-aware com-pression framework for animatable 3D Gaussian head avatars. The proposed framework decomposes dynamic head avatars into a compact canonical Gaussian representation and frame-wise head-prior parameters, reducing temporal redun-dancy while maintaining flexible animation capability. To further improve the compactness of the canonical represen-tation, we develop a semantic-aware density control strategy that leverages head-prior semantics and learned perceptual sensitivity to jointly perform region-adaptive densification and pruning. The proposed SACHA enables more efficient allocation of Gaussian primitives across different semantic regions, and experimental results demonstrate that SACHA achieves favorable rate-distortion performance, while pre-serving high-quality multi-view rendering, showing its po-tential for efficient transmission of dynamic Gaussian head avatars. References 

Blanz, V.; and Vetter, T. 1999. A morphable model for the synthesis of 3D faces. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interac-tive Techniques , SIGGRAPH ’99, 187–194. USA: ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. ISBN 0201485605. Chen, Y.; Wu, Q.; Lin, W.; Harandi, M.; and Cai, J. 2024. Hac: Hash-grid assisted context for 3d gaussian splatting compression. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,422–438. Springer. Fan, Z.; Wang, K.; Wen, K.; Zhu, Z.; Xu, D.; and Wang, Z. 2024. Lightgaussian: Unbounded 3d gaussian compres-sion with 15x reduction and 200+ fps. Advances in neural information processing systems , 37: 140138–140158. Fujii, D.; Unno, K.; Nonaka, K.; and Kawamura, K. 2024. Preliminary Evaluation Results of G-PCC for 3DGS Con-tents. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG07, doc. no. m68773 .Giebenhain, S.; Kirschstein, T.; Georgopoulos, M.; Rünz, M.; Agapito, L.; and Nießner, M. 2023. Learning neural parametric head models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,21003–21012. Giebenhain, S.; Kirschstein, T.; Rünz, M.; Agapito, L.; and Nießner, M. 2024. Npga: Neural parametric gaussian avatars. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , 1–11. Kerbl, B.; Kopanas, G.; Leimkühler, T.; Drettakis, G.; et al. 2023. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field ren-dering. ACM Trans. Graph. , 42(4): 139–1. Kirschstein, T.; Qian, S.; Giebenhain, S.; Walter, T.; and Nießner, M. 2023. Nersemble: Multi-view radiance field re-construction of human heads. ACM Transactions on Graph-ics (TOG) , 42(4): 1–14. Lee, J.; Ahn, J.; Kang, T.; and Choo, J. 2026. TexAvatars: Hybrid Texel-3D Representations for Stable Rigging of Pho-torealistic Gaussian Head Avatars. In 2026 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , 1927–1944. IEEE. Lee, J. C.; Rho, D.; Sun, X.; Ko, J. H.; and Park, E. 2024. Compact 3d gaussian splatting for static and dynamic radi-ance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03822 .Li, S.; Liao, Y.; and Yu, L. 2025. A Potential Video-Based Anchor for Gaussian Splats Coding. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG07, doc. no. 72063 .Li, T.; Bolkart, T.; Black, M. J.; Li, H.; and Romero, J. 2017. Learning a model of facial shape and expression from 4D scans. ACM Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) , 36(6): 194:1–194:17. Liu, X.; Wu, X.; Zhang, P.; Wang, S.; Li, Z.; and Kwong, S. 2024. Compgs: Efficient 3d scene representation via com-pressed gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , 2936–2944. Lombardi, S.; Saragih, J.; Simon, T.; and Sheikh, Y. 2018. Deep appearance models for face rendering. ACM Transac-tions on Graphics (ToG) , 37(4): 1–13. Mildenhall, B.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Tancik, M.; Barron, J. T.; Ramamoorthi, R.; and Ng, R. 2021. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commu-nications of the ACM , 65(1): 99–106. Niedermayr, S.; Stumpfegger, J.; and Westermann, R. 2024. Compressed 3d gaussian splatting for accelerated novel view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 10349–10358. Qian, S.; Kirschstein, T.; Schoneveld, L.; Davoli, D.; Gieben-hain, S.; and Nießner, M. 2024. Gaussianavatars: Photoreal-istic head avatars with rigged 3d gaussians. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 20299–20309. Sandri, G.; Thudor, F.; Sabater, N.; and Chupeau, B. 2024. GeS-TM as Anchor for 3D Gaussian Coding. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG07, doc. no. m69429 .Song, K.; Cui, J.; and Zhang, J. 2026. ProgressiveAvatars: Progressive Animatable 3D Gaussian Avatars. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 32518–32527. Sullivan, G. J.; Ohm, J.-R.; Han, W.-J.; and Wiegand, T. 2012. Overview of the high efficiency video coding (HEVC) standard. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 22(12): 1649–1668. Sun, H.; Wang, C.; Xu, T.-X.; Huang, J.; Kang, D.; Guo, C.; and Zhang, S.-H. 2025. SVG-Head: Hybrid Surface-Volumetric Gaussians for High-Fidelity Head Reconstruction and Real-Time Editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-ternational Conference on Computer Vision , 13326–13335. Tang, H.; Yan, R.; Yin, X.; Zhang, Q.; Zhang, X.; Ma, S.; Gao, W.; and Jia, C. 2025. HGC-Avatar: Hierarchical Gaus-sian Compression for Streamable Dynamic 3D Avatars. In 

Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , 8125–8134. Tang, Z.; Feng, C.; Cheng, X.; Yu, W.; Zhang, J.; Liu, Y.; Long, X.-X.; Wang, W.; and Yuan, L. 2026. Neuralgs: Bridg-ing neural fields and 3d gaussian splatting for compact 3d representations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, 9493–9501. Wang, C.; Kang, D.; Sun, H.; Qian, S.; Wang, Z.; Bao, L.; and Zhang, S.-H. 2025a. Mega: Hybrid mesh-gaussian head avatar for high-fidelity rendering and head editing. In Pro-ceedings of the computer vision and pattern recognition con-ference , 26274–26284. Wang, Y.; Wang, X.; Yi, R.; Fan, Y.; Hu, J.; Zhu, J.; and Ma, L. 2025b. 3d gaussian head avatars with expressive dynamic appearances by compact tensorial representations. In Pro-ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 21117–21126. Wang, Z.; Bovik, A. C.; Sheikh, H. R.; and Simoncelli, E. P. 2004. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing ,13(4): 600–612. Weise, T.; Bouaziz, S.; Li, H.; and Pauly, M. 2011. Realtime performance-based facial animation. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG) , 30(4): 1–10. WG 07 MPEG 3D Graphics Coding and Haptics Cod-ing. 2025. JEE 6.2 on Anchor Generation. ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG07, doc. no. N01273 .Yin, S.; Chen, B.; Wu, X.; Liao, R.-L.; Chen, J.; Wang, S.; and Ye, Y. 2026. Towards Efficient 3D Gaussian Human Avatar Compression: A Prior-Guided Framework. In 2026 Data Compression Conference (DCC) , 153–162. IEEE. Zhang, R.; Isola, P.; Efros, A. A.; Shechtman, E.; and Wang, O. 2018. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 586–595. Zhou, H.; and Ni, Z. 2025. Perceptual-GS: Scene-adaptive perceptual densification for Gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12400 .